Perhaps the most essential?characteristic?of the motion picture is montage, from the French?monter, ¡°to assemble.¡± Montage refers to the editing of the film, the cutting and piecing together of exposed film in a manner that best conveys the intent of the work. Montage is what distinguishes motion pictures from the performing arts, which exist only within a performance. The motion picture, by contrast, uses the performances as the raw material, which is built up as a novel or an essay or a painting, studiously put together piece by piece, with an allowance for trial and error, second thoughts, and, if necessary, reshooting. The order in which the segments of film are presented can have drastically different dramatic effects.
Several major contributions to the theory of?montage?were made by Soviet directors. After the?Russian Revolution?of 1917,?Soviet?films were encouraged for their?propaganda?value, but film stocks were scarce. Soviet directors carefully studied the films of?D.W. Griffith?and other masters to make the most effective use of their own meagre resources. One of those early Russian directors,?Lev Kuleshov, conducted an experiment involving identical shots of an actor¡¯s expressionless face. He inserted it in a film before a shot of a bowl of soup, again before a shot of a child playing, and still again before one of a dead old woman. An unsuspecting audience, asked to evaluate the actor¡¯s performance, praised his ability to express, respectively, hunger, tenderness, and grief.
Sergei Eisenstein, who excelled both as a director and as a teacher, based much of his theory of film on montage, which he compared to the?compounding?of characters in Japanese writing. The character for ¡°dog¡± added to the character for ¡°mouth,¡± he noted, results not merely in ¡°dog¡¯s mouth¡± but in the new concept of ¡°bark¡±; similarly, film montage results in more than the sum of its parts. Still another great Russian director,?Vsevolod Pudovkin, also stressed the importance of the carryover in the spectator¡¯s mind. Only if an object is presented as part of a synthesis, he said, is it endowed with filmic life.
Three types of montage may be distinguished¡ªnarrative, graphic, and ideational. In narrative montage the multifarious images and scenes involve a single subject followed from point to point. In a fiction film, a character or location is explored from multiple angles while the audience builds a?comprehensive?image of the situation being explored or explained. Graphic montage occurs when shots are?juxtaposed?not on the basis of their subject matter but because of their physical appearance. Some avant-garde works depend on the spectator¡¯s ability to match the graphic relations of assorted images, such as the people, the objects, and the shapes of numerical and alphabetical figures in?Fernand L¨¦ger¡¯s?Le Ballet m¨¦canique?(1924) or the torpedoes, swimming seals, and blimps in Bruce Conner¡¯s?A Movie?(1958). In graphic montage, cutting usually occurs during shots of movement rather than ones of static action. This cutting on motion?facilitates?the smooth replacement of one image by the next. In ideational montage, two separate images are related to a third thing, an idea that they help to produce and by which they are governed. In?Stachka?(1924;?Strike), for example, the director Eisenstein, to whom the theory of ideational montage is credited, effectively conveys the idea of slaughter by intercutting a shot of cattle being butchered with shots of workers being cut down by cavalry.

Britannica Quiz
Famous Hollywood Film Characters Quiz

These three types of montage seldom appear in their pure form. Most ideational montage proceeds on the basis of the graphic similarity of its components, as does narrative montage when relying on graphic cutting to cover its movement. Similarly, the graphic matches between torpedoes, seals, and blimps in?A Movie?ultimately construct an idea of movement toward explosion and destruction. Besides the complications brought about by the intermixing of these types, the addition of the?sound?track multiplies the possibilities and effects of montage. Eisenstein and Pudovkin referred to such possibilities as ¡°vertical¡± montage, opposing it to the ¡°horizontal¡± unrolling of shot after shot. Because sound permits the establishment of relations between what is seen and heard at each moment, the film image can no longer be said to be a self-contained unit; it interacts with the sound that accompanies it. Sound relations (including?dialogue, music, and ambient noise or effects) may be built in constant?rapport?with the image track or may create a parallel organization and design that subtends what is seen. In all, montage appears to be the most extraordinary factor?differentiating?the motion picture from the other arts, and it is the one often singled out as the basis of the medium. Nevertheless, many films, including those of?Mizoguchi Kenji?of?Japan,?Roberto Rossellini?of Italy, and Jancs¨® Mikl¨®s of Hungary, rely not on montage but on the medium¡¯s unique qualities of luminosity, movement, and realism to convey their power and beauty.
The film experience
The viewing of motion pictures began as an experience limited to a one-person?audience. Soon after, the advent of motion-picture projection transformed the medium predominantly into a form of theatrical entertainment viewed by large numbers of people simultaneously. By the end of the 20th century, new technologies had made possible a wide variety of viewing options, ranging from the solitary spectator sitting at home to audiences of thousands in a single space or of millions over many?venues.

Kinetoscope
Interior view of the Kinetoscope, a device developed chiefly by Thomas Edison's technician W.K.L. Dickson in 1891 to show Kinetograph motion pictures. Inside the Kinetoscope's cabinet was a continuous loop of film threaded on a series of rollers. An eyepiece was set into the top of the cabinet.(more)
The?Kinetoscope, the first motion-picture viewing device, was invented by?Thomas Edison?and William Dickson in 1891. It allowed only a single spectator at a time to look through a peephole at the tiny moving images inside the machine. Within several years, projectors capable of enlarging the image on a screen in a theatrical space had been developed. Projected motion pictures soon rendered the peephole viewers obsolete, although the latter could still be found for decades as novelties in penny arcades and amusement parks.


Why do movie theatres serve popcorn?
Learn how popcorn became a popular snack to eat at the movies.
See all videos for this article
The motion picture?thrived?in the first half of the 20th century as a mass medium centred on theatrical exhibition. Attending motion pictures became a social experience shared among friends or in an audience of strangers. Although the physical setting was similar to live events such as stage or concert performances, fundamental differences arose in the viewing of mechanically reproduced images rather than living persons. Motion-picture audiences were more informal in dress and demeanour. Eating and drinking during screenings became common; indeed, the sale of items such as popcorn and soft drinks proved more lucrative to many exhibitors than box-office admissions. Consecutive repeat showings permitted patrons to enter and leave in the middle of programs, giving rise to the expression ¡°This is where I came in,¡± which became obsolete and largely unknown by the end of the 20th century, when theatres were cleared after each screening.
When television emerged as a competing home-entertainment medium after?World War II, theatrical film attendance suffered a severe decline. However, older movies became a staple of television programming, and television in turn began to serve as a significant?advertising?medium for promoting new films. While the television presentation of motion pictures varied in different countries, in the?United States?it was common on commercial broadcast channels to divide up the screening with frequent commercial breaks. After the introduction in the mid-1950s of CinemaScope and other widescreen formats for motion pictures in theatrical release¡ªa technological?innovation?intended to highlight the value of the large-screen?theatre?experience in contrast to the then small-screen home medium¡ªthese works were later altered for television release. In a technique called ¡°panning and scanning,¡± the original versions of widescreen films were rephotographed, sometimes with new?camera?movements added, to record significant screen events for the narrower television frame.
In the later decades of the 20th century, as theatrical movie attendance stabilized at much lower numbers than before World War II, the television became the predominant exhibition?venue?for films. In the 1980s the home-viewing experience dramatically expanded with the emergence of?cable television, with channels playing up-to-date motion pictures without commercial breaks, and especially with the development of the?videocassette recorder?(VCR), a device that could record television signals on cassettes of magnetic tape as well as play prerecorded cassettes. Movie companies released recent and older films in videocassette format, and neighbourhood video stores sprang up to rent or sell cassettes. Home viewers could choose what they wanted to see and take home motion pictures on video in much the same way as they might select a book to read or recorded music to listen to.
Newer technologies introduced at the end of the 20th and the beginning of the 21st centuries broadened the home viewing of motion pictures still further. Systems delivering television signals via satellite or digital cable offered hundreds of channels, many of them playing films continuously. The 1990s witnessed the introduction of the?DVD?(digital?video disc, or digital versatile disc), which converts?analog?audio and video signals into binary data that can then be read by a low-power laser. The DVD was a medium for?recording, storing, and playing movies that provided significantly more space for data than the?videotape?cassette¡ªso much more, in fact, that even early DVDs contained motion pictures in both their original widescreen theatrical-release format (i.e., in ¡°letterboxed¡± form, a term referring to the black bands that appear above and below the image on a television with a roughly square aspect ratio of 4 to 3) and in the ¡°panned and scanned¡± version. Sound tracks were made available in original or?dubbed?languages, and a variety of supplemental materials included voice-over commentaries from directors and other creative personnel, documentaries on the making of the film, preview trailers, screen tests, and more. The Blu-ray format, adopted as an industry standard in 2008, promised optical discs with even greater data capacity. The first decade of the 21st century also brought the widespread adoption of?video-on-demand?(VOD), in which home viewers could request instant delivery of motion pictures of their choice directly to their television or computer screens. Internet-based VOD played an increasing role in the distribution and circulation of motion pictures, especially with the rise of such streaming services as?Netflix. Also significant was?P2P?(peer-to-peer) file sharing, which was seen as a threat by film studios. While theatrical exhibition continued to play a significant role and?theatres?retained their?value?as social gathering places that could present large-scale images, the dominant trend in the experience of motion pictures gave home viewers increasing control over what films to see, when to see them, and how to see them. Viewers were able to stop the image, enlarge it, reverse it, fast forward, skip to desired scenes, and take charge as never before over the process of screening itself.
Expressive elements of motion pictures
Many observers have seen in films a means of expression comparable to?language. The French poet and filmmaker?Jean Cocteau, for example, called the cinema ¡°picture writing.¡± The language of film, however, is not the language of words, even though spoken?dialogue?has been an?integral?part of motion pictures since the late 1920s, and written captions were usually required to explain the action before that. It is primarily in the qualities of its images and sounds that the expressivity of the cinema must be sought. Certain basic traits of motion pictures may operate with the logic of natural language, but few theorists have held that cinematic expression follows rules like those of natural language. As Christian Metz, one of the foremost film theorists of the 20th century, argued, it is not?linguistics?so much as poetics that should serve as a model for those interested in understanding or explaining how a film works.
Various codes of expression have, nevertheless, been shown to operate naturally or to have been inculcated, and their effects can be calculated. Such codes and effects occur in all aspects of moviemaking and can most readily be categorized into those affecting?cinematography, editing,?sound, the script, acting, and design.
Cinematographic expression
The filmmaker has a number of ways of modifying the?camera¡¯s?neutrality and thereby the ¡°reality¡± that is conveyed to the audience. It is largely by means of these devices that the motion picture becomes such an expressive medium. Several of these expressive techniques should be emphasized. First, there is framing¡ªthat is, carefully selecting what will be included within each frame of the film and what will be?excluded. Second, there is scale, the size and placement of a particular object or a part of a scene in relation to the rest, a relationship that is determined by the placement of the camera. Third is camera movement, or the lack of it, during shooting. Fourth, there are the peculiar advantages of either colour or black-and-white photography that can be exploited. Finally, through the cinematographer¡¯s skill and knowledge of laboratory processes, other highly expressive techniques can be achieved. Each of these means of expression will be discussed below.
Framing
The process of framing is intended to eliminate what is unessential in the motion picture, to direct the spectator¡¯s attention to what is important, and to give it special meaning and force. Each frame of film, which corresponds in shape to the image projected on the screen, forms the basis for a graphic?composition?in the same way that the frame of a painting encloses the area in which the painting must be organized.

More From Britannica
United States: Motion pictures

Several different ratios of frame width to frame height, called?aspect ratios, have been used in motion pictures. The most common, known as the?Academy ratio, is 1.33 to 1, or 4 to 3, a ratio corresponding to the dimensions of the frame of 35-mm film. By using 70-mm film or a special?CinemaScope?lens, an image with wider horizontal and shorter vertical dimensions is achieved¡ªa proportion of about 5 to 2, or between 2.2 to 1 and 2.65 to 1. A similar effect, called?wide screen, was sometimes achieved without the expensive equipment required for CinemaScope by using 35-mm film and masking the top or bottom or both, giving a ratio of 1.75 to 1, or 7 to 4. Although some theatres in the 1970s were enlarged and widened to accommodate 70-mm images, a trend toward smaller theatres fixed the image ratio close to 1.85 to 1 in the?United States?and 1.66 to 1 in Europe.

Seven Samurai
Shimura Takashi (left) and Mifune Toshir¨­ (second from right) in?Seven Samurai?(1954), directed by Kurosawa Akira.(more)
The moderate elongation provided by the Academy ratio has proved most versatile for achieving standard compositional effects. For example, an expansive feeling is easily rendered when small-scale figures in the foreground are shot against a towering sky, as in?Days of Heaven. In the wide CinemaScope dimension, the tension established between the outward movement of the composition and the rectangle of the screen can readily be lost; nevertheless, early fears about wide screen¡¯s insensitivity to?intimate?love scenes proved to be unfounded, at least in the hands of careful cinematographers. A number of foreign directors, notably?Kurosawa Akira?(Japan),?Fran?ois Truffaut?(France), and Mikl¨®s Jancs¨® (Hungary), achieved stunning effects in CinemaScope by overcoming the fear of moving the camera, as seen in, respectively, the battle scenes of?Shichinin no samurai?(1954;?Seven Samurai), the bicycle ride in?Jules et Jim?(1961), and the nonstop camera dance of?M¨¦g k¨¦r a n¨¦p?(1972;?Red Psalm). Wide screen calls for an altered?aesthetic, because the spectator¡¯s eye is invited to roam the visual field, making connections that in the standard ratio are more tightly determined.
Regardless of its ratio, the frame may be divided to show two or more scenes at the same time. This technique is traditionally used for credit sequences, musical interludes, or moments when the presentation on a single screen of two or more simultaneous occurrences results in comic interrelationships, although frame division can be used to dramatic or purely aesthetic effect, as in?John Frankenheimer¡¯s?Grand Prix?(1966).
An effective use of framing consists of temporarily or permanently excluding a vital part of the action. Offscreen space may be said to function more actively in cinema than in painting or the?theatre. For example, the camera may remain fixed on the hero while the villain is perceived only as a voice saying ¡°Hands up!¡± or, in a science-fiction film, the camera may linger on the horror expressed by the victim before revealing the monster that is causing it.
Very strong dramatic effects may be obtained by oblique framing¡ªthat is, by turning the camera sideways so that the image on the screen appears?askew. This was done in the early Russian film?The Ghost That Never Returns?(1929), in which a prison riot shown by oblique framing gives the impression that the building is being pushed over. Some directors, such as Britain¡¯s?Carol Reed, made this a trademark (The Third Man, 1949).
Scale

King Kong
A scene from?King Kong?(1933), directed by Merian C. Cooper and Ernest B. Schoedsack.(more)
Since?scale?in the cinema constantly changes from shot to shot, the spectator can easily be deceived about the size of objects. When appearing next to enormous tables and chairs, for instance, actors can be made to look like midgets or children, as in the?Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy?comedy?Brats?(1930). By contrast, in?King Kong?(1933) a small-scale model of?New York City?was used to give the?illusion?of the actual city under attack by a giant gorilla. Scale may have a marked effect on the emotional tone of a scene. In the distance an actor may seem lonely, remote, helpless, pathetic; close up the performer may appear powerful, threatening, bestial. The scale of shots for artistic purposes ranges from an extreme long shot (the widest view on the smallest scale), with houses or ships appearing as tiny dots on the horizon; through medium shots, two shots (i.e., a shot of convenient size to include two actors), and others; to the extreme close-up, with part of a face, an eye, or a fist filling the screen (the most restricted view on the largest scale). Telescopic or microscopic shots beyond these extremes are often of scientific rather than artistic interest.

Orson Welles
Orson Welles in?Citizen Kane?(1941).
Different scales are occasionally?juxtaposed?in a single shot to produce an unmistakable dramatic or?rhetorical?effect. In?Orson Welles¡¯s?Citizen Kane?(1941), significant characters are repeatedly framed in the right or left foreground while in the background an action takes place that disturbs that character or that that character somehow controls. The gigantic political poster of Kane that rises behind the podium on which he, in the foreground, makes a speech promising to ruin his rival, Gettys, becomes suddenly the size of a postage stamp when the shot changes to one in which Gettys is in the foreground looking down on the insignificant speaker from a balcony. Through this use of different scales, Gettys is shown to have power over the action.
As has been noted, the camera?exaggerates?perspective, and this exaggeration adds to the dramatic effect. It is most striking in an ordinary still photograph of an enormous hand or a sunbather¡¯s giant feet that were close to the camera lens. In cinematography, the director ordinarily minimizes the effect of this distortion but occasionally uses it in an extreme form. In?Easy Rider?(1969), for instance, it was used to give an atmosphere of hallucination and nightmare to a drug-taking session, and in?Brazil?(1985) it was used continuously to promote an atmosphere of paranoia and nightmare.
Scale is affected by what precedes and follows. The?close-up?has its most dramatic impact coming after long or medium shots, and after many close-ups it is a relief to escape to the middle or far distance.
Shooting angle and?point of view
Another element in motion-picture?language?is the shooting angle. In common language, the phrases ¡°to look up to¡± and ¡°to look down on¡± have?connotations?of admiration and condescension in addition to their obvious reference to physical viewpoint. In one sense or another, children, dogs, and beggars are often looked down upon, while the preacher in a pulpit, the judge on the bench, and the police officer on a horse are looked up to. Even a slight upward or downward angle of a?camera?is enough to express a mood of inferiority or superiority.
Upward or downward shooting angles lead to questions of objectivity and subjectivity. In most motion pictures, both for variety and for breadth of treatment, the camera¡¯s viewpoint switches from one character to another and sometimes is associated with none of the characters but merely looks on. The camera may take the viewpoint of the heroine, looking with?dismay?at the villain as he breaks into her room; in this case, an upward camera angle gives a subjective impression of her fear. Similar subjectivity may be seen in a shot of buildings reeling in the way they might appear to a drunken man, as in the German classic?Der letzte Mann?(1924;?The Last Laugh), or in a rapid camera movement from a window to the pavement below to express a thought of suicide, as in the Italian Neorealist film?Umberto D.?(1952).

Lady in the Lake
(From left) Robert Montgomery, Lloyd Nolan, and Audrey Totter in a publicity still for?Lady in the Lake?(1946), directed by Montgomery.(more)
Occasionally an entire motion picture may be shot from one person¡¯s point of view, often with a personal narration accompanying the images. Rarely does this point of view literally take over the optical view of the character for an extended period. (One noted exception is the 1946 film directed by the actor?Robert Montgomery,?Lady in the Lake, in which the camera actually plays the main character. The entire film is seen from the camera/character¡¯s point of view so that the audience sees only what the camera/character sees. The movie is an interesting experiment in the use of subjective camera, but it is considered an artistic failure.) More often voice-over, music, or other elements are?combined?with shooting angle to render a particular character¡¯s feelings throughout a film.?Alfred Hitchcock?is generally considered the master of point of view, controlling (and even misguiding) viewer sympathy.
Extreme upward or downward angles are too far removed from ordinary experience to have many applications in motion pictures, but they may express exceptional situations¡ªa sick man on his back, a baby¡¯s or a dog¡¯s point of view, a woman in a pit or in a coffin, a spy covertly looking down on an enemy meeting. As with scale, the shots that precede and follow alter the effect of the shooting angle. Upward angles are stronger following a level or downward-looking camera, and vice versa.
Camera movement
Framing, scale, and shooting angle are all greatly modified by the use of camera movement. Filmmakers began experimenting with camera movement almost immediately after the?motion-picture camera?was developed. In 1897 photographers employed by?Auguste Lumi¨¨re and Louis Lumi¨¨re?floated a?cin¨¦matographe, the combination camera-projector devised by the French brothers, in a gondola through Venice to give viewers all over the world a?dynamic?view of that much-painted city.
One of the simplest and most common movements is to turn, or?pan?(from the word?panorama), the camera horizontally so that it sweeps around the scene. It can also be tilted up or down in a vertical panning shot or in a diagonal pan, as when it follows an actor up a stairway. Panning was possible quite early in film history, but methods of physically conveying the camera itself through a scene developed more slowly. Initially the camera was mounted on a dolly, truck, or other hand-propelled wheeled vehicle to?facilitate?smooth movement. Later, tracks were laid for the dolly or truck to ride on, providing even smoother, more effortless motion.?Trucking, dollying, and tracking can even be combined with panning in a complex movement that may require the adjustment of focus or aperture en route. One such camera movement that is often used imitates the gaze of a traveler who turns in a moving automobile or train to focus on a stationary point of interest.
Often commercial vehicles, such as trolleys, automobiles, or airplanes, are used to transport the camera; the relatively jerky ride they supply simulates real movement more accurately than does the steady motion provided by a specially designed apparatus. Nevertheless, the film industry has long sought equipment that would allow the camera (and the viewer) to weave in and out of action in the most?ethereal?way. The crane, which?facilitates?aerial movement, was developed in the late 1920s, replacing the jerry-built movable platforms, the slings, and the sleds that ingenious directors, such as?Abel Gance?(for?Napol¨¦on, 1927) and Marcel L¡¯Herbier (for?L¡¯Argent, 1929), both in France, had devised to achieve vertical or elevated swinging movements. Numerous special camera supports were developed in the later 20th century, many of which were originally developed for use on medical and scientific films. Equipment developed in the 1970s and ¡¯80s could be operated from a distance with electronic viewfinders, allowing the camera to follow vigorous continuous action with an ease and intimacy that had previously been unknown, as in the precredit sequence of?Raiders of the Lost Ark?(1981). The look and style of film art is constantly changing as technological advances increase the mobility of the camera and consequently the flexibility of the spectator¡¯s viewpoint.

Stagecoach
Scene from director John Ford's?Stagecoach?(1939), shot in Arizona and Utah's Monument Valley.(more)
Regardless of the level of technical capability, the effect of camera movement depends on the?context?and the pace of movement. At a deliberate pace the camera can explore a scene and reveal significant details. If it is raised well above the ground, the movement has a dreamlike power, and, when combined with slow motion, it may give a somnolent impression or express recollection or hallucination. The camera movement may end dramatically on a dagger, on a gun half-hidden in an assailant¡¯s hand, or on a suspicious bulge in a pocket. It may link the hero walking in the garden and the heroine watching him with loving eyes from a window. It may bring a dramatic surprise, as in the American western?Stagecoach?(1939), when director?John Ford?had the camera,?mounted?high above a rocky defile, move slowly from the stagecoach below to reveal a band of Indians waiting in ambush. On the other hand, the camera may simply turn away from a scene to leave the remainder to the spectator¡¯s imagination, as when it withdraws from a torture scene or from a love scene. In filming a conversation, the director may turn the camera from one speaker to the other, thus animating the scene with movement and showing the expression of the speaker, or listener, more closely than would be possible with a static two shot. Camera movement can even be used to change the scene to a distant place, to a different period of time, or to an imaginary world.
Very rapid camera movements may express a sudden surge of emotion or a?contemplated?action, as in the suicide from?Umberto D.?(1952). In?The Rains Came?(1939), as the heroine realizes with horror that she has drunk from a glass that may be contaminated with typhus, the camera rushes forward to a close-up on the fatal glass, shining in the darkness. These movements are often effected without physically moving the camera, by means of a zoom?lens, a lens of variable focal length that simulates the effect of moving toward or away from a subject by increasing or decreasing the size of the subject as the focal length changes. Although a zoom shot is generally smoother than a tracking shot, it always results in pictorial distortion. To zoom in from a distance to a?close-up, the focal length of the lens is changed from, for example, 18 mm to 125 mm. The former length curves the picture anamorphically on the sides, giving great depth to the background, while the latter tends to flatten the background. All objects within view are enlarged at the same rate. Tracking in from a distance to a close-up requires careful adjustment of focus, but depth and dimension appear more realistic.
Camera movement is one of the key indicators of the presence of a narrator. When the camera moves independently of the action, the narrator can be thought of as hovering above the action, poetically reacting to it or commenting on it. When the camera moves instead to keep the action in view, to follow as many elements as possible, the narrator can be thought of as a reporter investigating but not commenting on what is seen. The documentary tradition, particularly since 1959, when lightweight cameras and tape recorders first permitted extended handheld filming, represents this investigative function of cinema and of camera movement.
Directorial styles may be cataloged on the basis of an overall?predilection?for linking elements in a scene via cuts (montage) or camera movement. Eisenstein has already been cited as a master of?montage. One of the directors most acclaimed for the expressive use of camera movement is?Japan¡¯s?Mizoguchi Kenji. Although Mizoguchi was not beyond making strongly?rhetorical?points by?juxtaposing?shots, the overall impression his films convey derives from the use of a seemingly floating camera to join not only elements within a scene but also the scenes themselves. In?Ugetsu?(1953) the hero, seduced in a?hot spring?by a beautiful ghost woman, moves screen right to join her, while the camera pans left across the pool and then tracks along the ground. The shot dissolves imperceptibly into one in which the camera pans up to reframe the couple picnicking in an extreme long shot. The magical mixture of spaces and the conflation of time sensuously express the?erotic?imagination to which both the hero and the audience have fallen prey. Mizoguchi is known as a mise-en-sc¨¨ne director, one who is primarily concerned with the relationships within a shot rather than those between shots. His films rely on long takes, camera movement, and the expressive use of elements within the film frame to convey mood and emotion. The possibility of movement was so important to Mizoguchi that at the end of his career he invariably directed from a crane, even during static scenes.
Colour and black and white

scene from?Raging Bull
Robert De Niro (left) in?Raging Bull?(1980), directed by Martin Scorsese.
A practical, accurate commercial system of colour?cinematography?was not perfected until?Technicolor?was introduced in?Walt Disney¡¯s animated short?Flowers and Trees?(1932) and in the feature film?Becky Sharp?(1935). The introduction of colour was less revolutionary than the introduction of sound; the silent film soon disappeared, but, even though most feature films made since the 1960s have been in colour, black-and-white films continue to be made. In fact, directors such as?Woody Allen?(Manhattan, 1980),?Martin Scorsese?(Raging Bull, 1979),?Joel Coen?(The Man Who Wasn¡¯t There, 2001), and?Alfonso Cuar¨®n?(Roma, 2018) chose to film in black and white to give their movies a calculated tone.
A black-and-white motion picture is not merely a picture that lacks colour but rather an artistic creation with positive qualities of its own. An ample range of effects can be obtained¡ªfrom precise images, in which every hair, every grain can be clearly seen, to a smudged charcoal effect. In the cinema, black-and-white?composition?has often been designed to attain a distinctive dramatic impact.
Nevertheless, colour introduced a new world into the cinema and steadily grew more effective. It can be used to produce a powerful dramatic impression. The German director?Rainer Werner Fassbinder, for example, used garish colours in films such as?Despair?(1977) to lend a seductive but finally suffocating tone to his melodramas. A similar use of colour can be found in the American director?Todd Haynes¡¯s film?Far from Heaven?(2002). Both Fassbinder and Haynes were inspired by the Technicolor movies of?Douglas Sirk. The Italian director?Michelangelo Antonioni?claimed to have studied colour for years before venturing to make his first colour film,?Il deserto rosso?(1964;?The Red Desert). In that film he used disturbing yellows, pinks, grays, and greens, even going so far as to paint dump heaps and fruit gray for one scene, to express a neurotic woman¡¯s sensibility and the oppressiveness of her industrial?environment. He changed film stock for a sequence in which the woman tells her child a story about a girl on the beach. The bright postcard colours seen in that sequence contrast dramatically with the sickly grays and greens of the rest of the film. Colour can be employed even more symbolically than this; in Eisenstein¡¯s?Ivan Grozny II: Boyarsky zagovor?(completed 1946, released 1958;?Ivan the Terrible, Part II; ¡°Ivan the Terrible, Part II: The Boyar Conspiracy¡±), red turning to a bluish shade represents the fear of a pretender about to be assassinated.
Role of the?cinematographer
Cinematographers remain largely unknown outside the motion-picture industry even though their contribution sometimes matches that of the director in importance. Although the director has ultimate control over the visual image, the cinematographer actually records that image on film, translating the director¡¯s ideas and creating the atmosphere and the look of the film. The association between the cinematographers and the processing laboratory is also of highest importance, because the cinematographer often spends hours there after shooting, checking the negative. On most feature films a?camera?team (often consisting of a director of photography, a cameraman, and an assistant cameraman) shares the responsibilities.
Cinematographers are responsible for exact framing, sometimes for screens of more than one type. They also must decide upon the use of masking, the choice of?lens, the camera angle, and the control of camera movement. They must either keep the focus sharp or put all or part of the picture out of focus if this effect is required. Cinematographers also control slow motion or?accelerated?motion. With early hand-cranked cameras, the camera operator simply slowed down or cranked faster, but later special controls and cameras were developed. Trick photography was once effected by simple manipulation of the camera: magical transformations were made simply by stopping the camera and changing the scene, and the impression of backward motion was achieved by turning the camera upside down and reversing the film. More-elaborate processes now at the cinematographer¡¯s command involve laboratory technicians as much as the camera crew. Many effects require the actors to perform against a background of previously prepared film. The cinematographer must be in command of all these processes. The best cinematographers give a motion picture a visual style that is uniquely their own.
Editing


Study film-making techniques employed in an adaptation of John Millington Synge's The Well of the Saints
Using as its example the film adaptation of John Millington Synge's play?The Well of the Saints?(1905), this video discusses the role of an editor in filmmaking. It is a 1976 production of Encyclop?dia Britannica Educational Corporation.(more)
See all videos for this article
The process of trimming and piecing together lengths of film in order to make an artistically concise and complete motion picture is certainly the most obvious technique of film?language?and the one most often discussed. The terms?editing,?cutting, and?montage?are often applied interchangeably to the process. In?montage?the emphasis is on the?juxtaposition?of ideas resulting from this process; cutting stresses the physical work with the actual strips of film; and editing?encompasses?both.
A single shot (i.e., the length of film exposed at one time, without interruption, by one camera) makes a visual and aural record of some segment of the physical world; by effective editing, this record can be taken apart, restructured, and shaped into an imaginative world or a discourse about the world. While all viewers presumably notice that a film is made up of a number of scenes, few realize that even relatively sedate fiction films contain on average approximately 600 cuts, one every 10 seconds. Editors?strive?to hide their work by cutting on action, so that the movement of a character¡¯s arm in one location flows into another such movement elsewhere, masking the change of shot. More important is the principle by which an editor anticipates the spectator¡¯s line of inquiry. By releasing information just as the spectator needs it, the editor constructs a natural?drama?whose seams are invisible.
Probably the most common convention of this sort is the ¡°accordion¡± sequence, wherein, for example, a drawing room conversation between two people is introduced in an establishing shot of the setting and the actors. The editor will cut to a full shot of the actors once they begin their?dialogue, because their speech gives them prominence over the setting. To help viewers understand the?nuances?of the?dialogue, the editor will move in for a medium shot, showing both characters from the waist up. While many directors and editors stop here, Hollywood has traditionally gone in even closer, using alternating close-ups of each character (generally from over-the-shoulder shots) to convey?innuendos?and reactions. In the earlier days of cinema, an editor was likely to back out of the sequence in the reverse order, going from close-up to medium shot, to full shot, and finally to long shot, thus making the structure of the sequence resemble the in-and-out movement of an accordion. As audiences have increased in visual sophistication, some of these ¡°logical¡± steps have fallen away.
Unforgettable moments in films are often made possible through shocking?juxtapositions. When an initially smooth progression is disrupted by a quick cut to a close-up, as in the Halloween series of horror films, the effect can be startling and frightening. In such cases the editor insists upon a strange or important connection in a scene.
Beyond rendering scenes in unobtrusive or striking ways, editing connects scenes into sequences and larger units. It serves as a system of punctuation. In the standard Hollywood film a straight cut between two scenes suggests that the scenes are close in space or time, whereas other more visible forms of?transition?signal more distant relations. The picture may fade out and fade in, the screen being left dark for a moment. Or it may dissolve, or mix, to a new scene, one image showing on top of the other for a moment. The filmmakers may use other devices, such as a?wipe?(i.e., a line moving across the screen that wipes out the preceding image while introducing the next),?irising?(gradually reducing the old image from the edges to a pinpoint size and then expanding the new one in the reverse way), or a?turnover (in which the entire screen seems to turn over, with the new image seeming to appear on what was the reverse side).
The director may introduce creative touches in cutting. The German-born director?Max Oph¨¹ls, for example, connected the separate episodes of?La Ronde?(1950) by means of the musical leitmotif of a hurdy-gurdy tune. In?Vivre sa vie?(1962;?My Life to Live),?Jean-Luc Godard, one of the outstanding French?New Wave?directors of the late 1950s, introduced chapter headings marking the heroine¡¯s step-by-step involvement in prostitution and, ultimately, her murder, as if it were a?didactic?19th-century novel. In his British film?The Thirty-nine Steps?(1935),?Alfred Hitchcock, probably the greatest director of suspense films, cut from a woman¡¯s scream to the similar?sound?of a train whistle, an effect so dramatic that it was frequently imitated thereafter.
Editing permits highly dramatic effects that could never be staged in a single shot. In the American western?Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid?(1969), for example, the title characters are seen cornered by lawmen on a high cliff overlooking a river, into which they make an almost suicidal leap to their escape. Actually, the shots involving the two leading actors on the cliff and those of the dives were filmed weeks apart, and they involved different crews and even different rivers, yet the audience readily accepts the?illusion?created by the editing.?The Stunt Man?(1980) takes such editing as its very theme. The main character is engaged in the rigged dangers and tricks involved in making a movie, while the audience is fooled by the greater tricks of the film that it is watching. Editing opens up a bagful of ingenious tricks of substitution, tricks that allow a marvelous or tragic experience to appear as a natural occurrence in the filmed world.
The common illusionistic experience of motion pictures depends on editing for its force and excitement, but editing can play an even more important role in films that?bypass?or refuse the illusion of realism. The use of graphic and ideational montage demonstrates that some filmmakers purposely flaunt the fabrication involved in motion pictures. Many films incorporate extraneous material within their fictions in order to set the illusion of the story they tell against the hard reality of other types of images. In?Warren Beatty¡¯s?Reds?(1981), for example, interviews with ¡°witnesses¡± to the events portrayed in the film open, and occasionally interrupt, the story in order to validate the fiction being re-created as history. Conversely, in films such as?Zelig?(1983) and?Forrest Gump?(1994), editing techniques are used to interject fictional characters into historical footage in order to emphasize the narrative¡¯s sense of time and place. Editing permits the juxtaposition of very different kinds of material for a variety of?rhetorical?effects.
Like camera work, editing is a function that is ordinarily hidden from the audience, but it is vital to the finished picture. It is the editor¡¯s job to judge the length of each shot, choosing the exact moment to end a segment on the basis of the amount of detail it contains, its scale, its dramatic impact, and its?context?in relation to the shots that precede and follow it. The impact of the finished film depends on how well edits are made.
The director generally views the day¡¯s rushes (i.e., advance prints of the film shot that day) and, in consultation, selects what is to be used. Some directors spend a good deal of time in the cutting room; others spend none at all. Often the editor is influential in rearranging shots, discarding them, or even ordering reshooting or additional shooting. An important factor in the work of the editor is the?cutting ratio¡ªthe proportion of film shot to that used in the final film. Some directors shoot as little as 3 times as much as is required, while others may shoot 10 times as much or even more. In its widest sense, editing includes mixing the sound and?correlating?it with the visual film.

