 Using popular movies in teaching cross-cultural management
 Satish Pandey
 School of Petroleum Management,
 Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University (PDPU), Gandhinagar, India
Abstract
 Purpose– The present study aims to understand context and dynamics of cognitive learning of
 students as an outcome of the usage of popular movies as a learning tool in the management classroom
 and specifically in the context of a course on cross-cultural management issues.
 Design/methodology/approach– This is an exploratory study based on qualitative analysis of
 reflection notes of 14 students who participated in an elective course on “managing cross-cultural
 issues (MCCI)” in the second year of their MBA programme. Students were asked to submit reflection
 notes focused on classroom learning as an outcome of the course MCCI with specific reference to used
 movies Outsourced and My Big Fat Greek Wedding. Students’ reactions in their reflection notes were
 analyzed through qualitative content analysis.
 Findings– The findings of this study reveal that students found selected movies very relevant and
 effective in learning cross-cultural theories, issues and developing cross-cultural competence. They
 also enjoyed movies as learning experience in the classroom. Both instructor’s observations and
 students’ reactions regarding the effectiveness of movies as classroom learning tool are very positive.
 Practical implications– Popular movies, if appropriately selected and included in cross-cultural
 training programmes for expatriate managers, immigrant workers and managers who travel to
 different countries, could be very useful as a learning tool for developing multicultural perspective and
 cross-cultural competence.
 Originality/value– This paper could be very useful to academicians and researchers who want to
 use popular movies as an instructional or research tool for exploring the psychodynamics of classroom
 learning in management and social sciences courses or professional training programmes focused on
 cross-cultural management skills, global leadership skills, diversity management.
 Keywords Cross-cultural management, Movies in management classroom, Teaching with movies,
 Interculturalcommunication,Cross-culturaltraining,InternationalHRpractices,Cinema,Popularculture,
 Learning
 Paper type Research paper
 Introduction
 Cross-cultural management can be best understood as how people communicate and
 manage relationships with other people inside (co-workers) and outside (clients) their
 organizations in different cultural settings (Adler, 2002). Cross-cultural management
 skills are considered essential skills for global managers of transnational corporations
 or organizations going for internationalization of their businesses in other countries
 and regions. It is argued that manager having good level of cultural sensitivity/cultural
 intelligence and properly trained through appropriate cross-cultural training
 programmes; adjust in the foreign environment in less time, manage diversified
 teams effectively and perform better in overseas assignments. Cross-cultural training
 is essential for financial and strategic reasons and to avoid high rates of expatriate
 failures (Harzing and Pinnington, 2011, p. 392, 393). Cross-cultural training facilitates the expatriate’s cross-cultural adjustment in the host country and hence minimizes
 problem of adjustment (Black and Mendenhall, 1990; Kealey and Protheore, 1996,
 Tung, 1981). It also helps employees to become effective in their overseas jobs as
 quickly as possible because it provides coping techniques relevant to living and
 working in a specific foreign environment (McFarlin and Sweeney, 2006; Earley, 1987).
 That is why many Fortune 500 companies such as Motorola, IBM, BP, Shell Oil, and
 Du Pont invest heavily on cross-cultural training for their expatriates to make
 “trans-culturally competent” and reduce expatriate failure rates and maximize
 organizations’ competitive advantage (Harrison, 1994; Callahan, 1989, Caudron, 1991).
Relevance of popular movies in management classroom
 Importance of audio-visual media in classroom (training videos, films, television,
 internet) has always been appreciated by academicians across disciplines especially in
 management and social sciences (Livingston and Ignatius, 1947; Golen et al., 1982;
 Pescosolido, 1990; Champoux, 1999; Hunt, 2001; Hobbs, 2006; Tyler et al., 2009; Green,
 2008; Berk, 2009; Kenworthy-U’Ren and Erickson, 2009; Luccasen and Thomas, 2010).
 It has been argued that audio-visual media has greater potential to influence students’
 mindsets in the classroom compared to lectures and discussions. Popular culture
 materials like documentaries, feature films and television shows, if used effectively,
 could play a role in facilitating the active learning experience of students, more so in
 cases where the class size, historical emphasis or issues of diversity make it difficult to
 adequately engage students in active learning (Pescosolido, 1990; Burns et al., 2010;
 Goldenberg et al., 2010).
 Asignificant number of management scholars believe that young students tend to
 remember popular movie content more often than monotonous textbooks, research
 papers and other scholarly reference material. They are also very comfortable in
 connecting movie scenes, dialogues of actors, story of the movie and music with
 theoretical concepts explained in the classroom. Dunphy et al. (2008) argued in their
 paper that who would like to watch a training film on CEOs discussing management
 issues rather than popular Hollywood movies, e.g. 12 Angry Men (1957) or The
 Godfather (1972) which could be better connected to management principles in a far
 meaningful way. They argued further that training videos focused on professional
 development have limited appeal due to their burdensome subject matter and deadpan
 delivery; and fail to leave long-lasting impact on students. Popular movies are also
 recommended because of their easier accessibility to educators and students when
 compared to professional training videos, educational videos, documentaries and other
 audio-visual media resources available in the market. Gallos (1993) emphasized that
 popular films can be powerful vehicles for teaching students’ conceptual flexibility and
 ability to shift perspectives. She also cited several movies in her paper which could be
 very useful for management trainers in teaching multiple cultural contexts of the same
 situation, e.g. Dead Poets Society (1989), The Karate Kid (1984), Rashomon (1950),
 Working Girl (1988), Born on the Fourth of July (1989). There are several open resources
 available on the internet to management scholars, trainers and students which suggest
 long list of recommended Hollywood movies useful for academic and training
 purposes.
Using popular movies in intercultural/cross-cultural training
 The use of films in intercultural training has been recommended by a number of
 scholars (Bhawuk and Brislin, 2000; Champoux, 1999; Littrell et al., 2006;
 Summerfield, 1994; Mallinger and Rossy, 2003; Varner and Beamer, 2005; Verluyten,
 2007, 2008). As Cardon (2010) state that one of the primary benefits for university
 students is that films are entertaining, engaging and in many cases stimulate
 curiosity towards other cultures. Films can be very valuable intellectual exercise in
 deciphering other cultures and with guidance and help of the instructors, students
 can learn nuances of cultural theories and constructs very easily by means of films
 shown in the classroom (Cardon, 2010; Mallinger and Rossy, 2003; Tidwell, 2001;
 Bhawuk and Brislin, 2000). In their study, Smith et al. (2010) reported about their
 experience of successful usage of the movie Crash in teaching cross-cultural
 intelligence and measuring students’ understanding of cultural perception, cultural
 communication, cultural identity and cultural relations through a multi-step 3608
 evaluation process. They found that students performed well in understanding the
 causes of cross-cultural problems but performance related to basic understanding of
 cross-cultural concepts did not fare well. They reported further that students found
 the movie Crash very engaging and enjoyable and they chose scenes in their written
 reports because of their emotional appeal not for their relevance to specific cultural
 concepts.
 There are few academic contributions available in intercultural training literature
 where scholars have presented their innovative approach to teach cultural theories or
 cross-cultural management by using films in the classroom, e.g. Mallinger and Rossy
 (2003) on Gung Ho,Tidwell (2001) on The Joy Luck Club and Fools Rush In, and, Cardon
 (2010) on Slumdog Millionnaire. Cardon (2010) has found the movie Slumdog
 Millionnaire, a very valuable tool to learn about principles of stereotyping across
 cultures, and Indian culture particularly. He strongly recommended Slumdog
 Millionnaire for non-Indian students studying in American universities, as being a
 popular Academy Award winning movie as Best Picture, probability of its availability
 in the market is quite high and awareness of students about this film also could be very
 high; and most of them might have seen it. Bumpus (2005) recommended a valuable
 reviewed collection of six movies relevant to teaching OB concepts with diversity
 perspective in MBA classroom, which could be very relevant in context of a
 cross-cultural training programme:
 A Soldier’s Story (Jewison, 1984);
 The Associate (Petrie, 1996);
 Smoke Signals (Eyre, 1998);
 The Joy Luck Club (Wang, 1993);
 For Love or Country: The Arturo Sandoval Story (Sargent, 2000).
 There are several documents available on recommended lists of movies useful in
 intercultural training, e.g. Intercultural Training with Films by Christine Roell (2010),
 which could be helpful to instructors looking for appropriate movies for using in their
 courses.
 Films in the classroom: a theoretical context
 As Champoux (1999) said in his classical article “Films as a teaching resource”; “films
 are a comfortable familiar medium to contemporary students that can keep student
 interest in the theories and concepts under discussion.” He added further that although
 most films are fiction, they can offer powerful experiences that students are unlikely to
 have in a classroom. Film scenes can offer visual portrayal of abstract theories and
 concepts taught in management and social sciences courses. Explaining concepts
 through different film scenes bring theories closer to realistic situations. Films can
 provoke good discussion, assessment of one’s values and self if the scenes have strong
 emotional content. Cinema’s ability to create a unique experience gives it unbeatable
 power as a teaching tool (Champoux, 1999).
 Cognitive impact of films on learning
 Psychologists have argued in favor of impact of films on cognitive learning of students
 in the classroom. As Blasco et al. (2006) said that the use of film in learning and
 teaching is crucial to provoking the reflective processes and attitudes in the learner.
 Someothers also argued that learners’ ability to retain and recall information as well as
 overall satisfaction with the learning experience was significantly higher where film
 was an integral part of the learning and teaching activities (Lesser and Pearl, 2008;
 Casper et al., 2003; Butler et al., 2009). Champoux (1999) argued that films offer both
 cognitive and affective experiences in the classroom. Film scenes could be very helpful
 in enhancing analytical skills of students and changing their worldview as they offer
 opportunity to connect theories to realistic situations. Ayikoru and Park (2011) argued
 that films (particularly popular movies) have significance influence on students’
 cognitive learning in the classroom; as:
 visualization and imagery and the potential to move from imagination to reality
 and possibly vice versa;
 memorization and recall of learned material long after the initial learning in a
 classroom setting;
 emotionality and stimulation of the senses during and after learning;
 positive motivation mainly for less motivated learners; and
 stimulation of intellectual curiosity and criticality.
 Benefits of using popular movies in the classroom
 Educators and researchers have advocated several benefits of using popular movies
 and films in the classroom. Pescosolido (1990) argued that the use of films can be
 important in learning and teaching, and highlight particularly that active learning can
 be encouraged and better supported through the use of audio-visual materials from the
 popular culture arena. It is also argued that using films could encourage students to
 engage to different and personalized articulations and viewpoints concerning the
 issues being examined, which may be rather difficult to attain in traditional teaching
 methods including lectures; and films proved to be useful in the context where
 different, multiple and varying perspectives need to be recognized and critically
 evaluated (Ayikoru and Park, 2011). Ayikoru and Park (2011) also argued that using
 films is unmistakably bound up with enhancing emotionality in learning and teaching
 development, as well as having a potential to motivate less enthusiastic learners.
They further argued that using films is perceived as an effective teaching tool for
 instructors in the areas where they lack practical experiences or struggle to inspire
 students with conventional delivery methods. Using films in the classroom also
 challenge relationship equations (traditional power distance) among instructors and
 students and both the parties may see themselves as co-learners in the process
 (Ayikoru and Park, 2011).
 Pedagogical challenges of movies in the classroom
 Using films or popular movies in the classroom is not an easy task for instructors.
 Champoux (1999) cautioned instructors regarding usage of films in the classroom as
 f
 ilm scenes could be strong distracters in the classroom for some students and using
 f
 ilms in classroom also reduces time for theoretical discussions. Butler et al. (2009)
 argued wheninformation mentioned in text not consistent with information revealed in
 f
 ilms, students tend to recall incorrect information rather than correcting
 inconsistencies in information, which needs to be handled cautiously. Ayikoru and
 Park (2011) mentioned three main pedagogical challenges of using popular movies in
 the classroom, which should be handled carefully:
 (1) The difficulties of finding thematically relevant film to support learning and
 teaching. The instructor needs to work hard in selecting the right movie
 relevant for the session or course.
 (2) The instructor’s ability to stimulate and guide class wide discussions once a
 given film has been shown to the learners. The instructor needs to be confident
 in using movie as an effective learning tool.
 (3) Effective time devoted to film show during class hours. They recommended 30
 minutes for two hours session and ten minutes for one-hour session for showing
 movie clips.
 Mallinger and Rossy (2003) brought attention of scholars and researchers to a very
 important issue regarding usage of movies in management and social sciences courses,
 that is handling of cultural stereotypes in a diversified classroom. There may be some
 uncomfortable situations in the classroom if students find some scenes objectionable
 on grounds of racial, caste, language, religion or any other kind of prejudice. There are
 also chances that films shown in the classroom may strengthen certain stereotypes
 among students against some specific groups if this issue is not handled carefully by
 the instructor in the classroom. Careful selection of films which are not limited to
 portraying and representing one dominant narrative/people will be another way of
 minimizing undesirable outcomes of using films as educational material (Ayikoru and
 Park, 2011). Mallinger and Rossy (2003) also advised instructors to select movie scenes
 very carefully and recommend that scenes loaded by with nudity, violence or foul
 language should not be shown in the classroom as some students (females and
 students believing in strong moral or conservative religious values) may not like it or
 refuse to participate in classroom discussions.
 Another important challenge which instructor may find difficult to handle, is to use
 foreign language films (dubbed or subtitled) in their courses as mean to expose
 students to foreign culture. Champoux (1999) cautioned management scholars and
 trainers about this limitation arguing that some students may not like to watch foreign
films with subtitles, and foreign films can also have culturally-based subtleties
 (e.g. humor, satire) that a nonnative might not understand easily.
 Different methods of using popular movies in management courses
 Champoux (1999) suggested that a film as an effective learning tool can be used in
 different ways in the classroom, e.g. as case, experiential exercise, metaphor, satire,
 symbolism, meaning, experience and time. Braim (2010) presented an exhaustive
 theoretical account on different cultural themes identified in the movie Outsourced on
 four different functions- as metaphor, experience, case and meaning and. Huczynski
 and Buchanan (2004) proposed that films can be effectively used as narrative in
 theory-building and exploring different perspectives in management classroom.
 Champoux (1999) further suggested that there are four different ways to use a film in a
 teaching course. An instructor can show film scenes in the classroom:
 before the theoretical discussion;
 after the theoretical discussion;
 repeatedly in the classroom or;
 one can show two different movies on the same story to generate comparable
 different perspectives on a specific social, cultural, psychological or management
 issue.
 In view of the author, a film can be used in several different ways as given below:
 The instructor can show very few selected scenes from a selected movie in one or
 two sessions in a course and generate discussions on specific theories, models
 and issues. This method is useful when the instructor wants to make classroom
 discussions interesting and motivate students to learn through audio-visual
 media. This method is also best suited for those instructors who want to just give
 a trial to themselves and students with popular movies as classroom learning
 tool.

 The instructor can show the entire movie before theoretical sessions. Selected
 scenes can be repeated in the classroom, if required during discussions. This
 method is useful when the instructor wants to focus on students’ reflections on
 the movie before building theoretical framework. For using this method, the
 instructor has to make arrangement for separate screening of the entire movie to
 students before they come for planned theoretical discussion in the classroom.
 This method consumes more time.
 The instructor can give introductory lecture on relevant theories before the
 movie show and later starts discussion on the movie and relevant theories. This
 method is very helpful in preparing students for a rigorous theoretical discussion
 in the classroom and developing their analytical skills.
 The instructor may use few selected movies as cases in the entire course and
 show selected scenes from different movies in different theoretical sessions to
 generate discussions as per pre-decided session plan. In this method, selected
 movies are used as continuous cases to integrate various theories and models
 across different sessions. This method is very useful when the instructor wants
 students to link and integrate various theories and models across different
 contexts
The instructor may assign some selected movies to students as individual or
 group project assignment and ask them to do film analysis on the basis of
 relevant theories (cultural, social, psychological, political etc.). Students will get
 CD/DVD of the movie from video libraries, do library or internet research and
 submit the project report to the instructor. This method is very useful in
 exploring and developing students’ creativity, theoretical and applied
 knowledge, project management and team management skills. This approach
 is also suggested by Fontenot and Fontenot (2008).
 The methods described above are not only exclusive methods for effective usage of
 popular movies in the classroom. Films can also be used to conduct experimental
 research in the classroom but in that case, applying experimental control is not an easy
 task for any researcher because of easy accessibility of popular movies to students.
 Smith (2009) has strongly argued in favor of heavy usage of popular movies in
 organizational behavior courses, he used 46 selected movies and ten scholarly articles
 in his course and movies were used as a kind of preview material before planned
 classroom sessions. As mentioned in his paper, this approach was very successful and
 well appreciated by his students. There could be numerous variations of using popular
 movies in management or social sciences courses but it solely depends upon the
 instructor how one views different pedagogical tools in context of a specific course.
 Methodology
 The present study is conducted with an objective to understand students’ perceived
 effectiveness of popular movies as classroom learning tool in context of the course
 “Managing cross-cultural issues”. The author has been using popular movies in
 teaching courses on organizational behavior for last five years and observed that
 students found movies very interesting source of theoretical and practical learning, and
 relevant to realistic life situations. The author believed that a qualitative study of
 learning notes of students could be very useful in understanding context and dynamics
 of cognitive learning of students as outcome of usage of popular movies as learning
 tool in the management classroom and specifically in context of a course on
 cross-cultural management issues. The study has been conducted by keeping the
 following objectives in mind:

 Howdostudents perceive popular movies as an effective learning tool in context
 of the course on cross-cultural management issues?
 How do popular movies influence students’ cognitive learning in context of the
 course on cross-cultural management issues?
 How do students perceive relevance of popular movies in achieving learning
 objectives of the course “managing cross-cultural issues”?
 The course: managing cross-cultural issues
 The course on “Managing cross-cultural issues” is an elective course offered to second
 year MBA students of School of Petroleum Management, Pandit Deendayal Petroleum
 University, Gandhinagar (Gujarat state, India). The course was designed and taught by
 the author during academic years 2009-2010 and 2010-2011. The course is designed to
 achieve the following learning objectives:

 To help students in understanding issues related to cross cultural diversity at
 work places.
 To sensitize students to the need for managing differently in diverse cultural
 environments.
 To develop skills for diagnosing and understanding heterogeneity of cultures,
 and to function effectively in different cultural environments.
 Course pedagogy. The course was conducted in a seminar-cum-workshop format and
 different pedagogical techniques such as lectures, case discussions and group project
 were used to achieve the goal of effective learning. The selected movies Outsourced
 (2006)[1] and My Big Fat Greek Wedding (2002)[2] were adopted as video cases in the
 course to make classroom learning more interesting and relevant to students. The
 course was conducted in ten classroom sessions of 90 minutes each (total 15 classroom
 hours), contributing to 1.5 credits to students.
 Sample. The present paper is based on author’s own teaching experience with two
 batches of MBA second year students. The 2008-2010 batch had 14 students (13 boys
 and one girl) and 2009-2011 batch also had 14 students (13 boys and one girl) who
 opted for this course in their second year MBA. All of the students were Indian citizen,
 belonging to different states of India, in the age group 22-30 years and majority of them
 belonged to Hindu religion (barring one Christian student in 2008-2010 batch). In both
 the batches, most of the students had good command over English and Hindi
 languages (written and spoken), and had seen many English (Hollywood) and Hindi
 movies in the past. Some of them knew other Indian languages including Gujarati,
 Marathi, Tamil, Malayalam, Bangla, Orriya, Kashmiri, Sindhi and Telugu. An average
 student of the class had good fluency over English, Hindi and the language of one’s
 state. From national culture perspective, all of the students in both the batches
 belonged to “Indian” culture.
 Selection of movies. For the batch of 2008-2010, only Outsourced (2006) was used in
 the course. Positive feedback on using a popular Hollywood movie in a course on
 cross-cultural management motivated the author to go for including more movies in
 the next attempt. Hence, for the batch of 2009-2011, the author decided to include My
 Big Fat Greek Wedding (2002) for adding more flavor in the course content. Both the
 movies, Outsourced and My Big Fat Greek Wedding are also featured in the
 recommended list of Christine Roell (2010) in her paper on intercultural training with
 films. The author was not aware of many internet resources related to selected movies
 (cited in this paper) when these movies were actually used in the course as video cases.
 Hence, this paper is based on author’s experiences and observations in the classroom.
 Screening of movies. The author had experimented with the method-4 (as described
 in the section “different methods of using popular movies in the classroom” in teaching
 the course on “Managing Cross-Cultural Issues” to second year MBA students. Selected
 scenes from both the movies, Outsourced and My Big Fat Greek Wedding were shown
 different sessions as per pre-decided session plan and relevant theoretical issues were
 discussed in the classroom. If a scene needs to be discussed in the next classes, then it
 was repeated to refresh students’ memories on students’ demands, so they can quote
 dialogues, background or actors in their discussions. Some scenes from both the
 movies, which depicted sexual intimacy were skipped in screening, as there was only
 one female student in the batch.
Course work. Students were asked to read selected chapters from reference books,
 case studies and recommended research papers before each session. Students were also
 asked to refer to books Understanding Cross-Cultural Psychology, authored by Pittu
 Laungani (2007) and Asian Perspectives on Psychology, Henry S.R. Kao and Durganand
 Sinha (Eds) (1997); as these books present Indian and East Asian perspectives of
 culture as well as a wonderful comparative analysis of Eastern and Western cultural
 psychologies. The second main reference book Understanding Cross-Cultural
 Management, authored by Marie-Joe¨lle Browaeys and Roger Price (2008), is another
 wonderful book presenting a complete framework of cross-cultural management from
 Western perspective. Students were advised to explore more books on culture, cultural
 psychology, social psychology, cross-cultural management etc available in the library,
 so they do their own comparative analysis of different cultural theories and
 approaches. It helped very much in the classroom discussion when students could
 connect movie scenes shown in the class to various cultural theories and concepts, and
 their own life experiences. This created a very positive environment in the classroom.
 The task. The present paper is based on analysis of learning notes of students of
 MBA 2009-2011 batch. To evaluate learning outcome of the course, students were
 asked to write reflection note (within 1,000-1,500 words) on their classroom learning
 with specific mention to learning acquired through movies shown in the classroom.
 Students were asked to explain theoretical and applied aspects of their learning with
 proper examples from movie scenes.
 Data analysis. Students’ reactions written in their reflection notes were analyzed
 through qualitative content analysis. First, reactions with specific reference to movies
 were separated from statements related to general theoretical learning; and then
 classified and coded on the basis of indications of cultural concepts mentioned in those
 statements through thematic analysis. The data analyzed and discussed in this paper
 pertains to the batch of 2009-2011 (14 students only).
 Results
 Content analysis of students’ reactions
 As instructed by the author, 14 students of MBA batch 2009-2011 submitted their
 reflection notes as a part of course evaluation. Students’ reactions with reference to
 their learning of cultural theories and concepts from movies shown in the classroom
 were analyzed through qualitative content analysis. Tables I-II gives an account of
 content analysis data with reference to various theoretical constructs related to cultural
 theories considered for content analysis. The numbers mentioned in Tables I-II indicate
 number of students whose reactions were classified and coded under that category. For
 example, in the category “culture shock”, six students cited Outsourced movie whereas
 seven students cited My Big Fat Greek Wedding movie in their learning notes. The
 number does not indicate about frequency of a specific theoretical construct or theme
 used in different statements. Table I indicates that “culture shock” has emerged as the
 most dominant theme in the analysis, followed by “acculturation processes”, “cultural
 adaptation” and “intercultural communication”. Students’ reactions (as written in their
 learning notes) are cited in discussions on various theoretical themes. We have used
 two-lettered codes (abbreviations of students’ names) to indicate individuals s against
 their reactions for convenience in referencing and for maintaining confidentiality of theidentity.Therewasonlyonefemalestudent (HP,Gujarati)andallothersweremale
 studentsbelongingtodifferentstates,communities, languagegroupsetc.
 TableIIindicatesthattenoutof14studentscitedboththemoviesintheirreflection
 noteswhiledescribingtheirlearningoutcomeandsixstudentsoutof14citedboththe
 moviesincriticalstatementsrelatedtotheirperceivedlearningeffectiveness.Thereare
 onlythreestudentswhocitedthemovieOutsourcedonlyandonestudentcitedthe
 movieMBFGWonly.This indicatesthatboththemovieshave influencedstudents’
 classroomlearningverysignificantly.
 Perceivedlearningeffectivenessofmovies.TableIindicatesthatsixstudentsoutof
 14 have specificallymentioned statements focused on their perceived learning
 effectiveness of both themovies. It isveryvisible in the statement of JM(male,
 Gujarati, speakingGujaratiandSindhi languages), “Theobjectiveof thecoursewas
 well coveredwithhealthyclassroomdiscussionsamongstusandthemovies.The
 moviesshowedustherealscenariohowpeoplegetcultureshockandhowtheycopeup
 withit”.AnotherstudentPZ(male,Kashmiri, residentofDelhi)alsosaidinsimilar
 statement,“Bythehelpofmovies(OutsourcedandMBFGW),wecouldrelatebetterthe
 use of this subject (applicability ofMCCI course)”. These statements are quite
 supportingtosatisfactoryachievementoflearningobjectivesofthecourseasstudents
 findmoviesasconnectinglinksbetweenculturaltheoriesandrealisticlifesituationsas
 well asemphasizingonappliedaspectsofMCCI course.Theclassroomlearningis
 perceivedasveryrealisticandfocusedonexploringdifferentcontexts,asmentionedin
 thestatementofAT(male,NorthIndian), “The learningthroughmovieswasvery
 helpfulaswecouldseeandunderstandscenariomoreeffectively”.AnotherstudentNJ
 (male,SouthIndian)expressedinhisstatement,“Bothmoviescoveredawiderangeof
 cultural issuesand learning”which indicates that some students couldsee strong
 connectivity between cultural theories, issues and practical learning. The courseobjectives two and three specifically mention about the need of understanding and
 diagnosing different cultural contexts and managing in different cultural
 environments. It seems that students perceived these movies as valuable source of
 understanding different cultural environments in this course, as indicated in the
 statement of SO (male, Orriya speaking, belonging to Jharkhand state), “Through the
 movies, I came to understand that before visiting any new country or place with a
 different cultural background, one should have general idea of that culture, so that
 culture shock can be avoided”. The statement of SO also indicates that students have
 understood value and the need for cross-cultural training for managers looking for
 careers in other countries.
 These reactions indicate that in general, students appreciated the selected movies as
 a valuable tool for delivering effective learning in the classroom and they also
 expressed their satisfaction regarding achievement of learning objectives of the course.
 Wecan see here in their reactions that most of them were able to connect movies with
 their life experiences and course content quite easily and effectively. The movies also
 helped them in drawing their own picture of cultural understanding. The author also
 has observed that usage of movies in the classroom enhanced students’ interest in the
 course, kept them motivated throughout the course and helped them in developing
 their own perspective of different cultural theories. The author also felt that this entire
 process ends up in bringing collaborative learning in the classroom, a desired goal as
 mentioned by Ayikoru and Park (2011).
 Culture shock. Culture shock has emerged as the most dominant theme in the
 qualitative content analysis of students’ reactions in their learning notes as 13 out of 14
 students mentioned this concept and related concepts in their statements. Culture
 shock was also the most discussed topic across many sessions throughout the course.
 Whenstudents were shown the movie Outsourced first time in the classroom, students’
 f
 irst reactions on the scenes related to arrival of Mr Todd at Mumbai Airport,
 encountering taxi drivers, auto rickshaw ride, catching train and arriving at small
 town Gharapuri, were singing the same theme, “culture shock”. Students also
 mentioned some excerpts and examples from the chapter 1 “What is this thing called
 Culture?” and chapter 2 “A perspective on cross-cultural differences between Eastern
 and Western culture” from the book of Pittu Laungani (2007) while discussing
 experiences of Mr Todd in India. This concept came into discussions whenever there
 was any scope in any session and they reflected on how to cope with culture shocks in
 unusual situations. The importance of culture shock as a theoretical concept can be
 understood in the statement of NS (male, South Indian) who tried to connect this
 concept with his own life experience, “The experience of culture shock was well
 portrayed in movies Outsourced and MBFGW. The movie Outsourced has depicted
 f
 irsthand experience in a different culture very well and highlights culture shocks
 experienced by its characters very well. I also faced similar culture shocks when I came
 to Gujarat to join this MBA programme”. NS’s statement clearly tells us how students
 connect theories to their own realities when they watch relevant movie scenes in the
 classroom and discuss them critically. Another student NJ (male, South Indian) also
 expressed how both the movies are helpful in understanding relevance to culture shock
 and coping with culture shock- “These movies depict the importance of adjusting to a
 culture and overcoming culture shock”. Students have also understood the need for
 cross-cultural training for foreigners who are posted on overseas assignments beforethey land up in the foreign land, as culture shock is good enough to shake up one’s life.
 This can be easily seen in the statement of SO in context of Outsourced, “The movie
 shows how a foreigner visiting India get culture shock in different situations, but
 learns to adapt to it and overcome culture shock when meets another foreigner in
 restaurant, and learns to accept this new culture, improves his cultural intelligence and
 not bullying to Indians”. Needless to say, culture shock and coping with culture shock
 are considered important themes of any cross-cultural training programmes by
 International HR practitioners.
 Culture shock is not only understood in context of an individual’s experience of a
 foreign culture but also in different social contexts, e.g. family environment, marriage
 ceremony, public places etc. The movie MBFGW has emerged very effective in
 exploring different aspects of culture shock especially in context of family and social
 environment, as expressed by JM, “We learnt about culture shock and different
 aspects of culture shock. We initiated discussion on man-woman relationships,
 different cultures- one is too loud, expressive and conservative, patrirachial. Learning
 about model- denial, defense, acceptance, adaptation, adjustment, integration. We
 learnt how to cope with culture shock”. Here, JM has specifically mentioned about
 developmental model of intercultural sensitivity (DMIS) by Bennet (1986), which talks
 about ethnocentrism and ethnorelativism and how people learn to adapt when they are
 exposed to different cultural environment.
 Another understanding of culture shock emerged in classroom discussions on food
 habits, body language, social etiquettes, celebrations etc.; as HP mentioned in her
 critical statement in context of the movie MBFGW, “Culture shock for both families
 happens in form of food, their habits, speaking manners, eating, gathering, celebrating
 occasions etc. Small and nuclear family Vs Big and joint/extended family”. Students
 brought very rich content to classroom discussions on getting culture shock in
 different family environment, as the classroom was quite diverse in context of Indian
 culture. Students compared the Big Greek Family environment with a typical Indian
 (Punjabi/Gujarati) joint family and the Big Fat Greek Wedding ceremony with a
 typical Punjabi wedding ceremony, which reflect more of collective culture.
 Cultural adjustment and adaptation. As “culture shock” dominated discussions in
 most of sessions in the course. Another relevant concept that attracted students’
 attention in this course was “cultural adjustment and adaptation”. Students mentioned
 terms acculturation, cultural adaptation and cultural adjustment very frequently in
 their learning notes. The following statement of AT is a reflection on applicability of
 cultural adjustment model of Oberg (1960) in real life situations; “I understood cultural
 adjustment from honeymoon to irritation & hostility stage, gradual adjustment,
 biculturalism stage. Cultural adjustment takes its own time.” It is revealed in thematic
 analysis of reactions that two theoretical models, cultural adjustment model (Oberg,
 1960) and DMIS model (Bennet, 1986) have significant impact on their learning.
 Students also learnt that cultural adjustment or adaptation is a gradual process and it
 takes its own time. They also learnt about influence of multiple factors on cultural
 adjustment process; as we can see in the reaction of NJ in context of MBFGW– “This
 movie tells us about individualistic and collectivistic cultures. Boy gets culture shock
 when meets girlfriend’s family members. Boy learns about informal and jovial
 environment of family, importance of food, eating/drinking and celebrating every
 moment, stood firm on his decision of marriage and adapts to Greek culture. ...I learnt
cultural adaptation model- denial, irritation, acceptance, adaptation ... how to cope
 with culture shock.”
 Another important factor in cultural adjustment process, as identified by students
 through the movie MBFGW is “respecting and accepting other cultures as they are”.
 Here, reactions of two students sound quite similar:
 (1) PR (male, South Indian): “This movie shows us experience of an American
 marrying a girl from a conservative Greek family and how he cope with the
 situation, and both the families after initial resistance and uncomfortable
 encounters, learn to adapt with each other. This movie tells us about respecting
 and accepting other cultures.”
 (2) SO: “I learnt that nothing is impossible, though cultural differences are there but
 attitude to mix and adapt with other cultures, and respect to other cultures
 helps in cultural adaptation. The movie also depicted how people get culture
 shock and learn to overcome it”.
 Students have also recognized importance of one’s personal attitude in learning
 cultural adaptation process and overcoming their own resistance to culture shock
 situations. The statement of HP explaining attitude and behavior of Mr Todd
 (Outsourced) reveals how she found importance of involving other people in one’s
 cultural adaptation to the different cultural environment– “Mr Todd gradually learns
 about Indian culture and adapts lifestyle, e.g. with ‘Holi festival’, develops better
 communication with coworkers and other people around him ‘auntijee’ and others”.
 The author also feels that if in a course on cross-cultural management, students
 become aware of their own cultural stereotypes, learn to accept and respect other
 people and cultures as they are; this is itself a great learning outcome of the course and
 both the movies, Outsourced and MBFGW have achieved their learning objectives in
 that way.
 Cross-cultural competence and cultural intelligence. The third most important
 concepts as recognized by students in the course MCCI, is cross-cultural competence
 and cultural intelligence in connection with culture shock and cultural adaptation
 process. The statement of NS clearly indicates in this direction
I also learnt about cross-cultural competence and cultural intelligence through the movie
 Outsourced, when hero initially failed to recognize and respect cultural differences but later
 learnt, and started finding this environment and his colleagues and the country very
 interesting. This is my learning- how to adapt to new cultures after doing one’s homework
 properly, it is required in the age of globalization.
 During discussions in the session, students debated with critical arguments on
 “theoretical definitions of cross-cultural competence and cultural intelligence”. They
 debated over the issue if cultural intelligence could be enhanced through cross-cultural
 training as it is something like basic human ability to understand different cultures or
 it is cross-cultural competence, which should be focused in cross-cultural training as an
 essential skill. Another student VR (male, South Indian) stated in context of
 Outsourced
The movie shows us, when a foreigner enters in a country not by choice, there is an initial
 resistance to the culture of the country, which then accepted slowly where the individual feels that he can live with this culture, and slowly adapts to this new culture. This movie also tells
 about importance of cultural intelligence.
 Another student PR recognized that cultural intelligence also means our own
 understanding of how our behavior is perceived and interpreted by people of other
 cultures; and how can we improve our attitude and behavior with proper
 understanding of cultural intelligence, cross-cultural competence, culture shock and
 cultural adaptation process
This movie has given a great deal of learning since it involves the behavior of Indians and
 howourbehaviors are perceived ‘odd’ by foreigners. It shows about experiences of a foreigner
 in India, which he encounters in different situations and places; and how he learns to cope
 with them and becomes a good manager for his team members. It depicts well on culture
 shock, cross-cultural competence, cultural adaptation, cultural integration and cultural
 intelligence.
 The positive orientation of students in direction of understanding their cultural
 sensitivity is another objective achieved through both the movies in the course MCCI.
 One cannot change one’s cultural intelligence level through just one shot of
 cross-cultural training but exposure to theoretical concepts and relevant information
 through movies/simulation games may play important role in developing cultural
 sensitivity.
 Differences between Eastern and Western cultures. As the author used the movie
 Outsourced in various theoretical sessions and this movie shows experiences of an
 American expatriate manager in Indian Call Centre office, dealing with Indian people
 in the office and outside the office, with his boss in America and cultural adjustment in
 a different country; discussions revolved around cross-cultural differences between
 Indian and American culture specifically work culture. Students brought different
 examples from the first two chapters of the Pittu Laungani’s book on Understanding
 Cross-Cultural Psychology while discussing differences between Indian and American
 culture. In his book, Laungani has narrated a number of examples from his own life
 experiences with British, American, European and other Western countries and how
 people from Western countries perceive and interpret behavior patterns of Indians,
 Pakistanis and other South Asian countries. The statement of VP (male, North Indian)
 is quite relevant in this context
Differences in Eastern and Western work cultures can be easily seen in this movie. As we see
 that people from Western countries are more professional in their conduct and behavior
 whereas Eastern (particularly Indians) are driven more by emotional appeal within the work
 environment.
 Another student JM also reacted in similar way but presented different aspects of
 professional work culture in Indian offices of a US multinational company
Learnt about differences between Eastern and Western cultures, etic and emic approach of
 cultural study, could connect movie with concepts well with my own experience of working at
 IBM, as when some people from US came for project knowledge sharing and it was difficult
 for both of us (We– Indianteamandthem– USteam),andtheywerefacingalotofproblems
 and difficulties and could not adapt to situations.
 These statements indicate that through the movies students have learnt importance of
 cross-cultural differences between professional work cultures of different countries.

Awareness and recognition of cross-cultural problems underlying beneath the work
 environment is the first step in the direction of developing cultural sensitivity.
 While expressing their views on Indian culture particularly, the author has
 observed that few reactions of some students could be considered loaded with
 ethnocentric attitude, which could be strengthened through the movie Outsourced. The
 following two statements somewhere indicate in that direction:
 (1) SO: “The movie also shows that Indian culture cannot be taught in classrooms
 but one has to learn about it with joy and experiencing with feelings, and
 capture its essence”.
 (2) VR: “This movie is a completely relevant learning experience, as we belong to
 India, and the entire plot of the movie is tied with India. This movie tells us that
 Indian culture cannot be trained in the classroom but one has to feel, experience
 and learn it”.
 As per author’s own analysis of these statements, these statements are emotionally
 overloaded rather than expressing cultural sensitivity towards other cultures. One
 cannot deny this fact that life experiences are the best teacher for anyone in the world
 but people need professional training to learn cross-cultural management skills. If
 cultural competence cannot be taught in the classroom, there would be no need for
 training courses on cross-cultural skills and many multinational companies could not
 investing on cross-cultural training of their expatriates and immigrant workers. These
 statements confirm our findings quite similar to findings of Smith et al. (2010) that
 indicate students gets influenced by emotional appeal of movie scenes rather than their
 connectivity with cultural theories and concepts. Ayikoru and Park (2011) also
 cautioned over excess enthusiasm and emotional excitement of students in context of
 using movies for classroom learning, as in that case, movies could be great distracters
 from theoretical learning.
 Family culture and influence of family culture on self and personality. One of the
 important themes identified and recognized by students in the course MCCI is
 ‘influence of family culture on self and personality’. Both the movies were recognized
 as potential sources of learning in context of this theme during classroom discussions
 but MBFGW scored over Outsourced here if we look into written statements of
 students in their reflection notes. The two selected statements are good indicators of
 students’ perceptions regarding relevance of MBFGW on this theme:
 (1) SO: “I learnt that how family culture influences a person’s personality? Introvert
 girl born and brought up in an orthodox family. I learnt how cultural differences
 influence people’s relationships when two different families encounter each
 other”.
 (2) NK: “Watching it was a fun. The film exposes inner working of passionate
 Greek family, good learning about family culture, intense relationship among
 family members”.
 ThemovieMBFGWwasselectedbytheauthortocoverspecific topics, e.g. influence of
 family culture on individual’s self, personality, life style, attitude and behavior. The
 movie also enlightens on interpersonal relationships among family members and
 between different families. The only female student of the class (HP) also highlighted
 different relevant points on personality, attitude and behavior of Toula (the centralcharacter of the movie) in context of a Big Greek family and how girls are expected to
 sacrifice everything they wish, for the pride and honor of the family. She also tried to
 connect these issues in context of rearing of girl child in Indian families. In the
 classroom discussions, students tried to connect various scenes of the movie with a
 typical Indian marriage ceremony, and how different people act and react to different
 situations happening in a marriage ceremony. Many students in the classroom tried to
 identify similarities between the Greek family depicted in the movie with a typical
 Punjabi Indian family and some of them also shared their own personal experiences of
 similar intercultural marriages happened in their social circles. The movie also provide
 rich content in terms of scenes and dialogues to understand differences between
 individualistic and collectivistic cultures which is well recognized and appreciated by
 students during classroom discussions. Considering these experiences, the movie has
 achieved its learning objective in the course by bringing relevant theoretical learning to
 students.
 Discussion
 In this entire experiment of using two popular Hollywood movies, Outsourced and My
 Big Fat Greek Wedding, the author had different experiences during the course.
 Students, who joined the course, were quite enthusiastic right from the first session and
 maintained their enthusiasm throughout the course. Some cultural issues such as
 multiculturalism, ethnocentrism, individualistic and collectivistic cultures, culture
 shock and cross-cultural competence dominated the discussions throughout the course.
 Right from the beginning, students were well aware about relevance of cross-cultural
 management skills in their future career. In the beginning of the course, the author (as
 an instructor) was quite apprehensive about using selected movies across different
 sessions as students may lose continuity and interest in later sessions, which may
 impact quality of discussions negatively. However, it did not happen and students
 participated in discussions with full enthusiasm throughout the course. Another
 apprehension of the author was that while using selected scenes from different movies
 in the same session may distract students during discussion and students may find it
 difficult to connect theoretical constructs with different movie contexts but this
 approach was also liked by students and they found it quite interesting to connect
 scenes from different movies to the same theoretical concept, e.g. culture shock or
 intercultural communication. In general, students agreed that movies provided them
 variety of visual stimuli and ideas that forced them to see the same picture from
 multiple angles hence resulted into developing multiple perspectives on cross-cultural
 issues. These observations confirm that selected movies helped students in shifting
 theoretical perspectives (Gallos, 1993). Students found both the movies very
 meaningful and relevant in context of the course MCCI. Most of them agreed that
 these movies helped in achieving learning objectives of the course very effectively.
 Students were so involved in the course that some of them came up with their own
 recommendations on popular Hollywood, Bollywood (Hindi) and Indian languages,
 and even foreign languages movies which could be used in courses on cross-cultural
 management, cross-cultural communication or cultural studies. Some students
 expressed during classroom discussions that after having discussions on movies in
 context of cross-cultural issues, when they referred theories later for understanding of
 concepts, they could connect movie scenes with relevant theoretical concepts in a better
way. This observation is quite in line with findings of Champoux (1999), Tidwell
 (2001), Mallinger and Rossy (2003), Cardon (2010).
 One of the major objectives of the course was that at the end of the course students
 should develop their own theoretical perspective and enhance cultural sensitivity.
 However, it is very difficult to keep free oneself from lifelong learning of cultural
 stereotypes that are learnt in a specific cultural context. In a classroom, full of students
 of Indian national culture, mostly of Hindu religion and only single girl student in the
 class, it was a tough task to keep classroom environment free from cultural
 stereotypes. There were instances of arguments on gender issues and cultural
 stereotypes, cultural biases of Indians against Americans and Westerners or Indian’s
 special pride on their cultural values or cultural biases of Westerners against Indians;
 but all these incidences helped in realistic cultural learning in the classroom and
 developing multiple perspectives on cross-cultural issues (both, students and the
 instructor agreed on this point) and selected movies worked as catalyst in this learning
 process.
 Considering gender factor in the class, the author decided to skip “scenes with mild
 sexual intimacy” in classroom screening to avoid any embarrassing situation; as in
 both of batches (2008-2010 and 2009-2011), there was only one girl student in the
 classroom. Initially the author was quite apprehensive about active participation of
 only female student in discussions because of strong male dominance in the classroom;
 but it did not happen and despite being only one in the group, female students
 contributed to the best of their potential in classroom discussions. With this experience,
 the author confirms his belief that proper selection of scenes according to the nature of
 target audience is very important factor in determining success or failure of popular
 movie as a learning tool. The instructor needs to be very sensitive regarding cultural
 context of participants while selecting appropriate movie or movie scenes for the
 cross-cultural training programmes (Mallinger and Rossy, 2003; Ayikoru and Park,
 2011).
 Limitations of the study
 One of the limitations observed by the author in teaching course on ‘Managing
 cross-cultural issues’ was that both the groups (2008-2010 and 2009-2011) were
 dominated by males, Hindu religion and Indian national culture. The classroom
 experience could be far interesting and rich if students could be from diverse
 backgrounds (different nationalities, religions, ethnic groups, languages other than
 Indian sub-continent languages and 50 per cent female students), but these are
 “idealistic conditions” which an instructor can wish for teaching a course on
 cross-cultural management.
 Although all the students knew English very well but some of them found
 difficulties in understanding some words and phrases spoken by different actors in
 both the movies (may be because of foreign accent) but they were quite vocal in
 expressing their difficulties.
 Small batch size (14 in both the batches) is another factor, which acted as a
 limitation in classroom learning. A small group of students limits variety of ideas and
 thoughts in classroom discussions. On the basis of classroom observations, it is felt by
 the author that batch size of 25-30 could be ideal for such kind of courses focused on
 cross-cultural management, cross-cultural communication or cross-cultural skillstraining etc. A large group (more than 40) is not also recommended that an instructor
 may find it difficult to control the class and most of students may not be watching the
 movies seriously which may dilute effectiveness of classroom discussions.
 The author has experimented with only one of the methods (method-4) for using
 popular movies in the course MCCI. One can also test with other methods for assessing
 effectiveness of popular movies under different situations. For example, movies as case
 analysis project (individual or group project, method-5) could be used to understand
 differences in psychodynamics of individual and group learning by using movies as
 research tool.
 Conclusion and implications to international HRD practices
 Cross-cultural training is considered extremely important by international HR
 practitioners as it helps in developing essentials skills needed for global managers who
 are expected to work with culturally-diverse teams, manage with overseas clients,
 work in virtual workplace, travel different countries for business purpose and perform
 effectively in their assigned job domain. Though this study is exploratory in nature
 and based on qualitative analysis of reflection notes of a small sample (n ¼ 14) of MBA
 students who belong to a specific national culture “Indian”; but classroom experiences
 are good evidence that popular movies (if appropriately selected for a specific
 cross-cultural training programme) could be very effective in achieving learning
 objectives of the training.
 The findings of this study may be summarized as:
 Selected popular movies Outsourced and MBFGW are proved as effective
 classroom learning tool in context of the course on “Managing cross-cultural
 issues”, considering students’ perceived satisfaction regarding achieving
 learning objectives of the course and relevance of the selected movies in the
 course context.
 Students found both the movies quite interesting and effective instrument to
 keep them motivated towards continuous learning across different sessions in
 the course.
 Students felt that selected movies helped them in understanding cultural theories
 and concepts in light of realistic life situations. Though popular movies present
 dramatized version of a story and depicted behavior patterns may be
 exaggerated by the director for enhancing entertainment value of the movie.
 Students identified and recognized importance of some theoretical concepts such
 as culture shock, cultural adjustment and adaptation process, differences
 between Western and Eastern cultural perspectives, cultural intelligence and
 cross-cultural competence for developing cross-cultural management skills.
 Theyalso expressed that these theoretical concepts should be essentially covered
 and dealt carefully in any cross-cultural training programme for professional
 managers. They also suggested that development of cultural sensitivity through
 proper theoretical knowledge of cultural psychology is essential for any
 cross-cultural training programme and popular movies could be very effective in
 developing cultural sensitivity as they leave long-lasting impact on human mind.
 The author believes that positive experience of using popular movies in a course
 on “Managing cross-cultural issues” and insights generated through this
qualitative study could be very useful to academicians and researchers in
 understanding relevance of popular movies as pedagogical tool and as a research
 tool especially in context of cross-cultural management, cross-cultural
 psychology and international human resource management practices.
 However, it is also advised that one should use a specific pedagogical tool (be
 it movie, simulation game or case study) only when one feels comfortable and
 confident about it and believes that it is appropriate and will work in context of a
 specific academic course or professional training programme. Blind usage or
 inappropriate use of a pedagogical tool in any academic course or professional
 training programme has enough potential to deliver disastrous results to the
 trainer as well as participants of the programme especially in context of
 cross-cultural training programmes where one needs to be culturally-sensitive to
 participants. There is also a need to explore new ways of effective usage of
 popular movies in context of cross-cultural training programmes Notes
 1. The movie web site (www.outsourcedthemovie.com/ms_corptraining.html) recommends
 corporate training material developed by Michigan State Business School professors Aneil
 Mishra, PhD and Karen Mishra, PhD and global outsourcing consultant Atul Vashistha,
 Chairman of services globalization firm NeoIT, and founder of international business
 training company GlobalAbility. The review of the movie Outsourced may be accessed on
 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outsourced_(film)).
 2. The movie My Big Fat Greek Wedding is in recommended list of popular movies by The
 Cross-Cultural Training Centre (CCTC) of Central New Jersey (www.cctcnj.org). The review
 of the movie may be accessed on http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/My_Big_Fat_Greek_
 Wedding). Some suggested internet documents available on the movie MBFGW are: Iti
 Rakshit (2010) and Weschler (2003).