Learners’ Perceptions of Culture through Movies 
Sasiwimol Prathoomthin
National University of Singapore, Singapore 
Abstract 
Since language and culture are inseparable, we cannot be teachers of language without including knowledge 
of culture or vice versa. Educational research has revealed that the most successful language learners are able 
to take on the “mindset” of the foreign language speakers assuming the culture along with the language. It is 
believed that to fulfill the educational potential of language and culture teaching, learners’ language 
acquisition and knowledge of the target culture through foreign language classes can be enhanced by 
implementing teaching aids such as media. Movies are widely used as a teaching material in foreign language 
classes as they are a medium which can convey informational content of interest and relevance to learners’ 
world experiences. In addition, movies are an economical substitute for field trips and other real visits to a 
country in which the target language is used. While most movies are fictional, they can provide insightful 
learning experiences on the language and cultures of the native speakers which students might unlikely to 
have in a classroom. This article aims to explore how learners of Thai as a foreign language perceive Thai 
cultures through watching some selected Thai movies. I will also discuss some teaching implications for 
development of learners’ socio-linguistic competence by using movies as authentic material.
1 Introduction 
Language education research in the past decades has revealed that language and culture are 
inseparable. Cultural awareness and the learning of a target culture can aid the attainment of 
second language proficiency (Kramsch, 1993). In Kramsch’s view, second and foreign language 
learners necessarily become learners of the second culture because a language cannot be learned 
without an understanding of the cultural context in which it is used.  
It is believed that the most successful language learners are able to take on the “mindset” of the 
speakers of the foreign or second language, assuming the culture along with the language. After 
the learners are guided to a recognition of the cultural base of their own attitudes and behaviors, 
they are ready to consider others in a more favorable light. Through this process, what has seemed 
quaint, peculiar or downright reprehensible becomes more reasonable and acceptable. Once the 
second language learner comes to understand the behavior of the speakers of the target language, 
regardless of the original motivation for study, the task of adding the language becomes far 
simpler, both through acceptance of the speakers of the language and through increased knowledge 
of what the language means as well as what it says. 
To enhance learners’ language acquisition and knowledge of the target culture through foreign 
language classes, movies can be a selected means or medium to convey informational content of 
interest to learners’ world experiences. While most movies are fictional, they can provide 
insightful learning experiences on the language and cultures of the native speakers which students 
might unlikely to have in a classroom. 
This study aims to discover students’ perceptions of Thai culture through Thai movies. It is 
hoped that students will gain a better understanding of the target culture, culture awareness; that of 
their own and the others’. Given cultural awareness, it is hoped that students develop their overall 
abilities as learners of culture, a personal competence that they can apply to other culture learning 
situations. 
2 Background  
2.1 Overview: Language and culture  
Language is the principal means whereby we conduct our social lives. When it is used in contexts of 
communication, it is bound up with culture in multiple and complex ways. (Kramsch, 1998, p. 3) 
According to Brown (1994) culture is deeply ingrained part of the very fiber of our being, but 
language –the means for communication among members of a culture- is the most visible and 
available expression of that culture. And so a person’s world view, self-identity, and systems of 
thinking, acting, feeling, and communicating can be disrupted by a change from one culture to 
another. Tang (1999) suggests that to speak a language well, one has to be able to think in that 
language, and thought is extremely powerful. Language is the soul of the country and people who 
speak it. Language and culture are inextricably linked, and as such we might think about moving 
away from questions about the inclusion or exclusion of culture in foreign language curriculum, to 
issues of deliberate immersion versus non-deliberate exposure to it (Cakir, 2006). 
2.2 Cultural components 
Culture is multifaceted and complex. If we tackle the question “what is culture?” through a 
study of cultural anthropology, the discipline dedicated to the study of culture, the results might be 
overwhelming. Each school of though gives a different perspective of culture. I find a great 
challenge in finding the simple approach to its complexities, which are not derived from definers 
or definitions, but from the nature of culture itself. In the following, a definition of culture based 
on the realities and potential of the language teaching and learning will be discussed. Significantly, 
these realities address a view of culture that integrates language and culture.  
The following definition of culture is based on three interrelated dimensions: products, 
practices, perspectives (National Standards in Foreign Language Education Project, 1990): - Products are all artifacts produced or adopted by the members of the culture, including 
those in the environment, such as plants and animals. Products range from tangible objects – such as tools, clothing, written documents, or buildings – to more elaborate yet still 
perceptible constructions such as written and spoken language, music, or complex 
institutions of family, education, economy, politics, and religion. Products, both tangible 
and intangible, are located and organized in physical places.  - Practices comprise the full range of actions and interactions that members of the culture 
carry out, individually or with others. These include language and other forms of 
communications and self-expressions as well as actions associated with social groups and 
use of products. These practices are both verbal and nonverbal and include interpretations 
of time, space, and the context of communication in social situations. Practices also involve 
notions of appropriateness and inappropriateness, including taboos. - Perspectives represent the perceptions, beliefs, values, and attitudes that underlie the 
products and that guide persons and communities in the practices of the culture. These 
perspectives can be explicit but often they are implicit, outside conscious awareness. Taken 
as a whole, perspectives provide meaning and constitute a unique outlook or orientation 
toward life – a worldview.
2.3 Learners’ and cultural experiences  
I have adopted the Cultural Knowing Framework proposed by Moran (2001) to support my 
argument concerning how students learn the target culture through interactions or learning 
processes. To illustrate, cultural experiences consist of four interconnected learning interactions as 
follows: 
Knowing about 
This interaction includes all activities that consist of gathering and demonstrating acquisition 
of cultural information – facts, data, or knowledge about the products, practices and perspectives 
of the culture. Pedagogically, students are expected to master information about the target culture. 
Knowing how 
This interaction involves acquiring cultural practices – behaviors, actions, skills, saying, 
touching, looking, standing, or other forms of “doing”. At the end of the learning processes, 
students are required to be able to adapt or integrate into the target culture – to appropriately 
interact with the native speakers of target culture. 
Knowing why 
This interaction deals with developing an understanding of fundamental cultural perspectives – 
the perceptions, beliefs, values, and attitudes that underlie or permeate all aspects of the culture. 
Through this interaction, students are required to practice skills in probing, analyzing, and 
explaining the cultural phenomena they encounter, which necessarily involves a comparison with 
their own culture.  
Knowing oneself 
This interaction concerns the individual learners – their values, opinions, feelings, questions, 
reactions, thoughts, ideas, and their own cultural values as a central part of their cultural 
experience in the target culture. It deals with self-awareness. Individual learners need to 
understand themselves and their own culture as a means to comprehending, adapting to, or 
integrating into the target culture. Ultimately, it is the learners who decide the extent to which they 
engage in, accept, explore, or become part of the culture and develop expertise as cultural learners. 
2.4 Analysis of the target culture 
The analysis of the target culture is as challenging as the investigation of one’s native culture. 
It is assumed that as students begin to study various facets of the target culture, they will begin to 
realize that their own culture incorporates a complexity of patterns which they have never been 
aware of. In addition, it is assumed that students discover that a culture is not a static but an ever
changing phenomenon (Valette, 1986). A dozen major “themes” are proposed by Howard Lee 
Nostrand (Nostrand, 1974 cited in Valette, 1986) which is a sample study which tries to 
understand how students perceive the target culture. The twelve themes look for patterns in the 
feelings, beliefs, and thought process of members of the target culture. It is assumed that certain 
ingredients are characteristics of the behavior of a member of a culture. The procedure is to 
combine experience of the people’s way of life with descriptive knowledge about the people, so 
that the resulting study is an examined experience of the target culture. The twelve themes which 
have been implemented widely in analyzing culture are the following (Nostrand, 1974 cited in 
Hughes, 1986, p. 166): 
 The art of living: enjoyment of the lifestyle one has chosen 
 Intellectuality 
 Individualism and civil liberty 
 Realism and good sense 
Law and order  
Distributive justice  
Friendship 
Love 
 Family 
Religion 
The quest for community 
Patriotism
2.5 Movie as experience  
In my study, films have been chosen to provide insightful learning experiences for students to 
be engaged in observing and learning about the target culture. Learners can develop and gain their 
cultural awareness through films (Tomlinson and Masuhara, 2004, cited in Ho, 2009, p. 7). Films 
are widely used among language teachers in order to convey informational content of interest. In 
addition, films are an economical substitute for field trips and other visits to a country in which the 
target language is being used (Champoux, 2007).   
2.6 Films as new ways of learning  
Films are a multimedia technology being implemented in language education as an authentic or 
real-life material that replicates alternative ways of acquiring knowledge that are different from 
printed media. Films offer an exploratory and motivating type of learning as follows (adapted from 
Kramsch, 1993): - Films provide a world of knowledge that is non-sequentially organized and that invites 
relational thinking and hierarchical structuring of the phenomena observed. - It is suggested that students have to learn how to use the acquired knowledge in varying 
situational contexts for varying purposes and movies enhance a domain of cultural 
knowledge that has to be learned across different contexts. - It is believed that movies invite learners to reinterpret, reorganize, and reconstruct prior 
knowledge in light of the new, to recognize the traces of prior texts and events as they 
appear in new contexts, endowed with a new value. - Films are an accessible authentic material and lie in the construction of certain social reality 
by a society in dialogue with itself. Having been exposed to movies, non-native learners 
have to construct and reconstruct the meanings. - Upon finishing watching films, a common comprehension classroom activity is to have a 
discussion in which students are given opportunities to explore various levels of 
understanding and to be conscious of their own knowledge assets and deficits. 
3 Methodology  
3.1 Research question  
The research is intended as an exploratory study to investigate the culture learning of non
native learners of Thai (Beginners 2) at the National University of Singapore, Singapore. It 
attempts to answer the research question: what cultural aspects of Thai native speakers which are 
portrayed in the selected films will be perceived by the non-native learners of Thai? 
3.2 Participants 
Of 21 students who are reading Thai 2: LAT2201 as a foreign language at the Centre for 
Language Studies of the National University of Singapore, the participants in this study are 10
 students whom I meet in class every Friday. They were asked to participate in the study on a 
voluntary basis. The students enrolled in this course have completed Thai 1 which required them 
to attend 66 hours of tutorials within one semester. They have quite little background knowledge 
in Thai language and culture. In this current course of Thai language, the participants are also to 
meet the same requirement regarding the number of contact hours. The participants consisted of 7 
female and 3 male undergraduates, and are from different faculties, ranging from Arts and Social 
Sciences, Science, Engineering, Business, Law, and Computing. The participants were in their 
second and third year of university study. Their ages ranged from 18 to 24. 
3.3 Method 
The instrument for data collection was a list of selected Thai movies. Though the movies are 
commercial, they were implemented as an authentic material for non-profit and educational 
purposes. Each participant was asked to choose to watch a Thai movie from the given list and 
watch it at his or her own time. Upon completed viewing the movie, the participants were asked to 
write their perceptions of Thai culture learned from the movie. They were allowed to write it in 
English as it is hoped that they would be able to articulate and express their views better. Also, 
given the participants’ language proficiency, they still lack of expressions to express their views 
critically in the target language. Having received the participants’ write-ups (averagely 1 page 
long), I have categorized their reflections of Thai culture through Thai films into different themes 
as demonstrated later in the Findings. 
The selected films are:  
 “Overture” by Itthisunthorn Wichailak 
 “Citizen Dog” by Wisit Sasanathieng 
“My Girl” by Nithiwat Tharaathorn 
 “Long June” (name of the protagonist) by Kamol Srisawat    
 “Suriyothai” (name of a Thai Queen) by Chaatriichalerm Yukhon 
“Mor 8” (secondary school 8) by Yongyoot Phinitphong 
Criteria for choosing the movies are as follows: 
 availability of the film 
 appropriateness in terms of language use, contents, scenes 
 English subtitle provided (to suit the learners’ language proficiency and to serve the main 
aim of the study whereby perceptions of Thai culture are to be explored) 
3.4 Limitations and remarks on further study  
As mentioned earlier, to serve as a tool to trigger the participants’ perceptions of the target 
culture, an appropriate Thai film with English subtitle is needed. Nevertheless, it is quite difficult 
to find such a good choice. In addition, due to the time constraints, I could not show all selected 
films to all participants in a common theatre. I also wished to watch a movie with each participant 
so that we would be able to have a discussion on the culture portrayed right after the show. It is 
believed that this activity will motivate their interest in the target language and culture even more. 
I hope to be able in future to conduct a further study in class whereby all students watch the 
very same movie excerpt followed by a discussion in Thai language on the target culture perceived 
through the movie clip. 
4 Findings  
In attempting to understand the students’ perceptions of Thai culture through the selected Thai 
movies, I have categorized and described my findings into three major themes in which beliefs, values and patterns of activities or behaviors of Thais have been reflected on. The three themes are 
life styles, attitudes and characteristics and education. 
4.1 Life styles  
The students have observed a few aspects of Thai life styles from the watched movies. 
Significantly, the simple life styles of Thais, especially of those who live in the rural area have 
been portrayed. A student has witnessed how Thai children in the villages spend their time or play 
with their peers as follows:  
We see the simple lives of Thais in their daily dealings. The kids play by the river, with rubber bands 
etc. perhaps this is the life in Thailand in the village now, or in the cities in the past. It gives us a 
glimpse of how much globalization has taken place in the cities in Thailand as well. But the simple 
things in life will still remain the same. This film also gives us a glimpse of the simplicity and 
innocence in the lives of the children – and it is being portrayed very well. (Student A on “Long 
June”) 
In addition, an awareness of some aspects of lives in a big city has been raised by the students. 
Drugs, gambling and hectic life styles of Thais living in a big city have been noticed by students as 
follows: 
The movie shows the dangers of city life. From the movie it seems that it is easy to get involved with 
drugs and gambling as a young person. However, it also shows that these things can be avoided and 
lives can be changed. (Student A on “Long June”) 
In the film, urban Thais in Bangkok are seen rushing and squeezing into the public bus without 
complaints. The extremeness of such hectic lifestyle is demonstrated when Yod and his girlfriend find 
pleasure squashed in the bus packed full of hectic urban Thais. This is in contrast to the countryside 
lifestyle, to which the director portrays Pod’s family ploughing the rice fields in extreme slow motion. 
(Student I on “Citizen Dog”) 
Having seen how Thai children play with their friends through a movie titled “My Girl”, the 
students have become aware of one reality which seems to happen or be seen everywhere. 
… the realities of the world are also shown in the film … how Jeab actually rejected Noi Nah in order 
to be part of the other group etc. Aside from the warmth Thais bring, they are not exempted from all 
these realities as well. (Student B on “My Girl”) 
A very heart warming film, and also, it really portrayed the realities in our lives in a very real manner. 
(Student B on “My Girl”) 
Some students who have chosen to watch a historical movie titled “Suriyothai” have perceived 
the close relationship between Thailand (Siam) and China. One of the dominant aspects which has 
been noticed is the trade between the two countries and the influence of Chinese arts or products 
during Ayuthaya period. 
… The movie hints at thriving trade between Siam and China, as well as exquisite carvings and gold 
leaf on almost every piece of furniture portrays a prosperous 16th century Siam with the grandeur of 
Thai palaces and royal households clearly seen … (Student E on “Suriyothai”) 
A very interesting point which has been perceived through a movie titled “Overture” is 
adaption of Thais’ life styles to the western culture which has strongly influenced Thailand since 
the nineties: 
Regarding the point about modernization: if I'm not wrong, the high-ranking official in the movie was 
a real-life military general who was bent on introducing modern, Western culture influences to Thailand for the sake of advancement. I thought this scene summed the whole idea up: the piano 
player was playing a funky, jazzy tune while the elderly Thai music Ajarn (teacher) looked on with a 
"I'm not impressed" expression, but subsequently sat down to accompany the same tune with his 
ranad-ek. So it was dislike and resistance initially, but this gave way to acceptance and adaptation to 
suit traditional Thai culture. (Student C on “Overture”) 
The traditional Thai costumes worn during the period of Ayuthaya kingdom seem to be a 
prominent, exotic and eye-catching feature of Thai culture to the students. A few comments on the 
issue are as follows. 
Through the movie, one could also observe the way how Thai people are dressed up, which is very 
different from other countries. (Student F on “Suriyothai”) 
The film “Suriyothai” provides a glimpse into the life of the people of Siam at that period of time. 
The first thing that caught my attention is the attire of the women. The traditional costumes, though 
simple, were in my opinion very elegant. (Student E on “Suriyothai”) 
An issue significantly associated with Thai culture and Thai life styles which has been 
perceived through watching the film “Citizen Dog” is migration. The students have been aware of 
Thais living in the rural areas migrate to a big city of Thailand in quest of career advancement, 
educational opportunities and ultimately better lives. 
… In the movie, both Pod and Jin represent the large proportion of Thais who make up the waves of 
migration into the city in search of employment and consequently a better life. Along with migration, 
the movie depicts the reaction that brings from the point of view of different generations of villagers. 
(Student G on “Citizen Dog”) 
The movie also portrays the lives of these migrants once they get into the city: their accommodation, 
standard of living, and their way of life in general. Even though this seemingly simple portrayal of 
migrant life, elements that are uniquely Thai can easily be sieved out. These include the forms of 
public transport (such as motorcycle taxi); and the type of employment that these migrants usually 
take up (e.g. security guards, factory workers, taxi drivers, maids). (Student G on “Citizen Dog”) 
… Furthermore, the film reflects the older generation of rural folks as apprehensive about the 
advantages of working in the city. Yet the younger generation of the rural community is drawn 
towards the city as it represents wealth, better future prospects and modernization, as opposed to the 
agrarian lifestyle back in the countryside. (Student H on “Citizen Dog”) 
4.2 Attitudes and characteristics  
Typical Thai beliefs and characteristics have been reflected in the students’ write ups revealing 
their awareness of how Thais show high respect to their King and Royal family.  
Thai people show great respect for their King. One could observe how the Thai people greet their 
king. (Student F on “Suriyothai”) 
… All Thais revere the King … (Student C on “Overture”) 
Thai manners have been observed; it is believed that Thais appear reserved, gentle and calm 
though they are facing chaos, hardships or difficulties. 
Another as aspect of Thai culture that is very prevalent in the film is the gentleness of the people. 
Even with the war undertones, everyone was still immensely polite in conversations, slow to anger 
and raised voices were almost non-existent. (Student E on “Suriyothai”) 
The movie has affirmed my opinion on Thai as being very polite and soft-spoken. Thais hold a very 
strong culture where there is a great sense of respect for the people around them, be it their own 
countrymen or foreigners. It is indeed very impressive and respectable to note that even in this fast
paced and competitive world, we still have a huge country in South-east Asia that is practicing good 
manners. (Student J on “Mor 8”) 
A gender issue associated with attitudes of Thais towards women’s roles has been pointed out. 
Through the movie “Suroyothai”, one student learned that Thai women have been holding 
important roles in supporting the country, society and family. Queen Suriyothai, the protagonist in 
the movie is just an example figure among other Thai women who have greatly contributed to the 
country. 
… Suriyothai is portrayed as a woman with strong opinions and a great deal of self determination. I 
was surprised at the amount of freedom that Suriyothai had as a young girl and even after her 
marriage. Although women had more submissive roles, being able to converse freely with people of 
the opposite gender other than her family members and even learning to use European weaponry, was 
an opener. It is hard to imagine the freedom women enjoyed, as a compared to other Asian cultures of 
that time. (Student E on “Suriyothai”) 
… Thai women now have more opportunities to be as successful and as capable as men … (Student A 
on “Long June”) 
A tendency towards modernization in Thai society was also observed. Though English is a 
foreign language in Thailand, those who know English are generally regarded as educated, capable 
and civilized people living their successful lives in cities. And this ideal issue is associated with 
modernization and westernization. 
… Furthermore, it is clear that westernization and the English language have been accepted as the 
benchmark of modernized Thailand … (Student H on “Citizen Dog”) 
How Thais view the relationship among family members and between teacher and student has 
been obviously reflected in the students’ discussion. The students have observed that Thais value 
the sense of unity in a community and relationship in a family through the movies “Long June”, 
“My Girl” and “Citizen Dog”. 
The movie shows that Thais value friendships very much. Long June always tried to protect his 
friends and his friends would help him in return. This shows a great sense of community spirit among 
the Thai people. (Student A on “Long June”) 
The Thai family is a very important thing in the society. From the movie it shows that Thai value their 
family relations very much, especially showing respect to their parents. Although Long June was 
mistreated by his father as a child, he still submitted to his father. Similarly, Ky, although a rebel 
outside, still tried not to be disrespectful to his father and did not retaliate when being scolded. 
(Student A on “Long June”) 
The show portrayed great family warmth amongst the different family members – in two different 
ways as well. Jeab’s family takes on the strict approach on disciplining him, in particular his mother. 
She beats him up when he comes back late, and we see the soft side of his father when his mother 
does it. On the other hand, family warmth in Noi Nah’s family is different. They take on the soft 
approach, perhaps because she’s a girl. Though discipline abound, it can be portrayed that the family 
loves one another and sticks together. This is probably very much like part of the Thai culture on the 
families. (Student B on “My Girl”) 
The underlying moral of the film, also presents to the viewer that there is more to life than superficial 
material comforts and that family, is the basic supporting unit that one can turn to in times of need. 
(Student I on “Citizen Dog”) 
Thais regard teachers as their second parents (as distinct from their biological parents). Hence, 
it is seen that Thai students pay high respect to and appear humble in front of their teachers. 
 I thought the teacher-pupil relationship was a big theme in the movie. In the movie Sorn (the 
protagonist) had to hide the fact that he wanted to play his dead brother's instrument from his 
father/teacher in the beginning, and after he got really good at it he still had to submit to his 
father/teacher's instructions to play another less showy instrument during a big showcase to a high
ranking official. I don't know if I got it right, but I thought this showed that pupils had to follow 
whatever the teacher dictates even if it went against what he really wanted, a somewhat familiar 
Confucian concept to me. But usually the teacher ends up making the right decision anyway :o) 
(Student C on “Overture”) 
… The film reflects the Thai culture of respecting teachers and is shown by the politeness of the girl 
students whenever they talk to their teachers … (Student C on “Mor 8”) 
The sense of hierarchy and how it relates to how respect is shown by, and for, people was 
raised in some students’ reflections. Thais show their sense of respect to whom they are 
communicating with. How a Thai behaves and expresses oneself in a context depends upon the age 
and social status of the interlocutor. 
Thais are always aware of the difference in status when interacting with one another. This helps them 
to ensure they show due respect to the people they are communicating with. This definitely helps to 
create a peaceful atmosphere. (Student J on “Mor 8”) 
Last, but not least, in regard to the belief of Thais, religious values have been perceived by a 
few students. In Thai society, more than 90 percent of population are Buddhists. Thais reveal their 
religious value through their practice in traditions, festivals and ceremonies. 
The Thai society practices Buddhism in their lives and Buddhist monks are highly respected. Some of 
the walls in the buildings are carved with Buddha faces. (Student F on “Suriyothai”) 
There are several ceremonies in the movies such as the royal marriage and cremation of the queen 
which is done in the Buddhist way. (Student F on “Suriyothai”) 
After watching the film, I was made aware of the importance of religion in Thai society. Throughout 
the film, there was a clear emphasis on reincarnation – an aspect of religious ideology still very 
relevant in contemporary Thailand. In the film, the reincarnation of the lead actor’s grandmother as a 
lizard allowed the viewer to have a greater understanding of afterlife as perceived by the Thai 
themselves. This scene created much entertainment yet at the same time relay the importance of 
karma and Buddhism theology in an unimposing manner. (Student H on “Citizen Dog”) 
4.3 Education  
Generally, it is believed that educated Thais are given more opportunities in terms of career 
advancement, comfortable life styles and high social status. Teachers in Thailand are highly 
respected by people in society and apparently educational institutes are regarded as sacred venues 
to Thais. Hence, Thais strive to complete a secondary school and tertiary education respectively. 
In Mor 8, the story brings to attention the issue of education, the importance of teachers and the 
aspect of cultural changes due to foreign influences in Thailand in comparison with early and modern 
times. The story although almost a comedy, stresses on how the Thais view education to be of utmost 
importance and also how teachers are a profession revered by the Thais due to the importance of 
education by the society. (Student D on “Mor 8”) 
From the movie, I see that Thai students take off their shoes before entering their classrooms. This 
shows how much they emphasize the importance of cleanliness among the students. Similar to the 
situation in Singapore, students greet their teachers when he or she comes into the classroom to teach. 
(Student J on “Mor 8”) 
I see that the Thai people put great emphasis on the dress code in schools. Unlike here in Singapore 
where some schools are giving their pupils ‘freedom’ to express themselves, Thais in the movie 
portray a very neat, prim and proper image of the students and even the teachers. Even the teachers, as 
seen in the movie, wear not too outstanding clothes. Instead, they are deck in almost similar fashion 
as well as the same color code. This again shows they high amount of respect they have for the 
learning institution. (Student J on “Mor 8”) 
5 
Suggestions for teaching implications  
It is believed that learners’ increased cultural awareness in relation to the target language helps 
develop their communicative competence in which linguistic knowledge, interactional skills, and 
cultural knowledge are involved. In considering films as cultural texts, students are required to 
express themselves and communicate in activities such as asking questions, giving answers, or 
discussing what happened in the films which were watched. Classroom-based activities can be 
designed according to the curriculum, students’ background and knowledge, their level of 
proficiency, and other related factors to incorporate language learning related to cultural 
knowledge. Having been introduced to a movie clip or excerpt in a language classroom, students 
can be asked to describe what happened in the scenario, what happened beforehand or they can 
even be challenged to predict or guess what will happen afterwards. Students can be asked to 
expand their description to include reference to specific communities in their own native culture, 
along with specific products, perspectives, and how individual persons whom they know respond 
to this practice.  
At another stage of the cultural experience, students can be encouraged to use the target 
language to develop cultural interpretations. The interpretations are based on cultural information 
elicited or presented during the introduction stage as mentioned above. At this junction, the topics 
shift from the concrete of description to the abstract of interpretation, from visible culture to 
invisible culture, from products and practices to perspectives. These functions thus involve 
inference, hypotheses, substantiation, justification, comparison and contrast, and other forms of 
langue that link concrete to abstract. At this stage of learning, students can be asked questions like; 
‘what cultural attitudes, values, beliefs, or perceptions are explicitly and implicitly portrayed in the 
shown movie excerpt?’; ‘how might participants in the given scene differ in their perceptions of 
this event?’; ‘how do distinct communities within the culture differ in their perspectives on certain 
issues?’; ‘and how do these attitudes, values, beliefs, or perceptions contrast with those of other 
cultures that you know?’ Students can be asked to provide information about these other cultures 
to substantiate their comparisons. 
Apart from the suggested teaching implications mentioned above, last but not least, it is 
suggested that learners can be engaged in knowing oneself and self-awareness. In line with the 
emphasis of this stage, the topic of discussion shifts from the culture to students themselves. The 
students’ own world becomes the subject matter. Their responses include feelings, opinions, 
values, beliefs questions, concerns, awareness, intentions, strategies, decisions, or plans that 
students may formulate as they anticipate further involvement in the cultural phenomenon. To put 
this approach into practice, students might be asked to respond to the questions, for instance: 
‘What thoughts, feelings, or opinions do you have about this cultural phenomenon?’; ‘Describe 
any personal experiences you have had with this cultural phenomenon.’; ‘Do you share the cultural 
values, beliefs, attitudes, or perceptions of this cultural phenomenon?’; ‘What more would you like 
to know or do in regard to this phenomenon?’. 
The language of response also involves the language used to illuminate the process of crossing 
culture, whether this be naming and managing cultural stereotypes, contrasting cultural values, or 
examining the applicability of models of cultural adaptation to students’ experiences. This can 
engage students in self-exploration of emotions, beliefs, or values.  
6 
Concluding remarks  
In this paper, “the intrinsic relationship of language and culture” (Saville-Troike, 1996, p. 360) 
has been significantly emphasized. I have discussed how the cultural knowledge can be integratedin language learning by having students revealed their perceptions of the target culture through 
implementation of movies which are considered motivating and culturally fruitful. Through the 
knowledge and understanding of the target culture gained, it is expected that will be an increase in 
the students’ cultural knowledge and understanding of the target culture which will ultimately 
develop their appreciation and empathy for the people of this very culture and their way of life. 
Last, but not least, it is important to state that the gained cultural knowledge not only develops 
students’ language abilities for effective and appropriate communication within cultural contexts 
of the target language and culture, but also their capacity to engage in intercultural situations, 
regardless of the cultures involved. 

