 Cultural values presented in Chinese movies
 Leilei Jia
 Abstract Either the purchase of a certain kind of goods, or the selection of different
 ways of life, or even upholding one’s faith is based on one’s cultural values.
 Therefore, the cultural values are actually the spiritual orientation system that
 determines the existence mode of mankind and the development direction of society.
 As a mainstream social ideology gradually developing in the long-term practical
 activities, the cultural values are not just the written signs in classic literatures, but
 embodied in changing expressions of artistic works, penetrating through massive and
 complicated commercial transactions, extending into the basic necessities of com
monpeople’s daily lives, and of course presented in the dazzling and colorful popular
 culture of movies.
 Keywords Chinese movies · Cultural values · Cultural competitiveness ·
 Cultural expression
 At present, Chinese local movies have been facing increasing pressure of
 competition, as more movies imported from Hollywood have continuously enlarged
 their market share in China, and the overseas movies have exerted the growing
 influence on local movies in the mainland of China. In the severe market
 competition, top priority must be given to enhancing the competitiveness of movies
 in the master plan for the development of Chinese movies. Without recognition of the
 market and attractions to the audience, a movie is almost valueless. Therefore, to
 enhance the market competitiveness of Chinese movies should be the most important
 part in the strategies of the industrialization of Chinese movies. However, market
 competitiveness does not just refer to the commercial competitiveness of a movie,
but also includes its cultural competitiveness. In other words, the cultural factors must
 be injected in the commercial conceptwhenamovie’scommercialcompetitiveness is
 improved. Therefore, we can by no means set the movie’s functions and its
 competitiveness against eachotherwhetherwhenwediscusstheartisticmissionofthe
 movie or the social responsibility and cultural function of Chinese movie. In other
 words, we cannot talk about a movie’s artistic mission, social responsibility and
 cultural function by putting aside its economic responsibility. Likewise, when we
 cheer for the victory of a movie at the market, we should not only summarize the
 movie’s business mode of operation and the successful marketing strategy, but also
 concern about its cultural expressions. Especially for those with magnificent themes,
 huge capital investment and a strong market response, the cultural analysis is as
 important as the summarization of its business experience. If a positive cultural value
 is effectively disseminated in these movies, then it will not only make a magnificent
 contribution to the historical development of Chinese movies, but also contribute to
 the long-term development of the Chinese culture.
 Yearning for Benevolence and Love
 The cultural values are the basic orientation embodied in a nation, a country and a
 culture in respect of lifestyle, social ideals and spiritual beliefs, and determine the
 basic judgments of people upon right or wrong, good or evil and beautiful or ugly in
 the political, social and ethical and artistic fields. What should be valued and what
 should not? What kind of life is meaningful and what is not? What kind of ideas can
 be accepted and what not? All these are closely related to people’s value orientation.
 The cultural values expressed in Chinese movies are not always consistent in
 spiritual aspect due to the difference in the subject matter, type and theme chosen;
 however, in terms of the overall value orientation, the representation of traditional
 Chinese culture and the recognition of traditional cultural value in Chinese movies
 is an important part of our analysis of the cultural experience of Chinese movies.
 As a kind of universally recognized cultural values, the thought of “Love and
 Charity” exits in different spiritual fields such as politics, philosophy, ethics and art
 and it is the organic integral part of the Chinese core value system. For thousands of
 years, the benevolent have been admired and the science of benevolence been
 observed, because, first of all, the science of benevolence teaches people how to love
 others. Research shows that, the Chinese character “仁 (benevolence)”, the
 composite of the other Chinese character “人(human)”, is the paronym of “任
(responsibility)” and “妊 (pregnancy)”, the other two Chinese characters. “仁” meant
 pregnancy in ancient times with the extended meanings as “giving birth to people”,
 “cultivating people”, “helping people” and “loving people”. Ruan Yuan, an ancient
 Chinese, says: “‘仁 (benevolence)’ means ‘人 (human)’”, that is to say, the essence
 of benevolence is to treat everybody in a way conforming to the universal will of
 mankind. In 2012, a movie called Painted Skin II bettered the box-office record in
 China. Integrating love, magic and action, the movie broke five records in the history
 of Chinese movies. As a typical commercial movie, what is the cultural value system
 behind it? In other words, what traditional cultural elements are injected into this movie? Xiaowei, a fox demonwhohadpracticed for a thousand years, saved a mortal
 man’s life by sacrificing herself, which violated the laws of the demon world, and she
 therefore has been imprisoned in an icy abyss for 500 years. It shows Xiaowei has
 stood on the same moral benchmark as human beings. After the bird demon rescued
 her from the abyss, she has been dreaming of becoming a human and living a human
 life. Once she asked the bird demon: “Do you have a human temperature and
 heartbeat? Can you smell flowers? Can you tell the color of the sky? Have you shed
 tears? Is there anybody in the world loving you and prepared to die for you?” These
 senses only owned byhumanbeings are what Xiaowei wantsmost—just as the Green
 Snake in the movie of Tsui Hark, for whom the tears in the human world are bitter,
 but it is after all a colorful and fragrant world. Finally, Xiaowei exchanges with her
 beautiful skin for the heart of Princess Jing and married to the State of Sirius on
 behalf of the princess, just to experience the short but happy human life. Yearning for
 the human world is both the theme of the movie and also its core value orientation.
 In fact, Xiaowei, touched by the human feelings of life and death, forsook evil and
 abandoned the bloody fight for the human heart, leaving the hope of living to her
 beloved person. Watching her beloved person gradually recovering from death, she
 slowly assumes the image of a fox. She returned to the side of the rock cave later,
 quietly watching the human world… Is it what a demon should do? The demons or
 ghosts we saw were either punished by gods or executed by human beings, but never
 died a martyr for a just cause. In this conversion from demon to human, the most
 touching part is not the incredible digital technology, nor the magical space
 modeling, but the humanitarian recognition of diabolism, the conversion from evil to
 benevolence. When talking about the impressive box office of a movie, we ought to
 pay attention to its expression of cultural values. Is the popularity of Korean movies
 and TV plays in Asia owing to the dazzling digital technology or the colossal
 production funds as the Hollywood movies? It is the cultural concept of benevolence
 and loyalty that make Korean movies popular among Asian audience. It shows that
 the culture is still the intrinsic power driving the wheel of the movie business.
 It is impossiblethattheancientChinesethoughtofbenevolencecutsacrossthetime
 tunnel of thousands of years to directly penetrate into the hearts of contemporary
 audience. It can be recognized, understood and accepted only through the appropriate
 carriers. The movie Five Bullets… is originally named as Gun of Mercy. The gun is a
 tool of violence, a killing weapon. “Mercy” with “Gun” is obviously not to strengthen
 the gun’s killing function or highlight its material power, but to emphasize its cultural
 metaphorandmoralstrength.NamedMercy,itbecomesagunwithjust,anditsholder
 showsapowerofbenevolence. Inthemovie, apoliceman nearthe retiring age escorts
 four prisoners with agunoffivebullets,allofwhichhavebeenshotinordertoprotect,
 save or help the people—none of them are really shot to kill. By the way, Chinese
 movies present violence not in the way as Hollywood movies, in which the blood
 splashes and flies about, showing a complete worship for mechanical violence. In this
 sense, the movie Five Bullets… fully reflects the humanitarian expression of China’s
 mainstream movies.
 Diego Gambetta, a sociologist, has ever told a story recalled by a head of Sicilian
 Mafia that, when he was young, his father (a member of Mafia) asked him to climb
 onto a wall and then jump down with the promise to catch him. At the beginning, he was reluctant; but with his father’s insistence, he jumped, but his father did not
 catch him and he tumbled completely. By this his father intended to make him
 know: “You must learn not to trust others including your parents”. This story has
 reoccurred in the Chinese movie “The Orphan of Zhao”. In this movie, when the
 orphan of Zhao jumps down from the roof, Tu Anjia withdraw his open arms and let
 the orphan fall onto the ground heavily. He intend to tell the orphan that nobody,
 with no exception of his foster father, was worthy of being trusted, and the only
 thing he can trust was the sword in his hand. Tu wanted to teach a philosophy, the
 brutal “rule of jungle”, to the child, so that he could uphold strength and power.
 When the orphan go to the roof again and jump down with his sword, Cheng Ying
 catches him, which tells the child that in the world there is still something more
 important than sword, i.e. love and benevolence. Maybe from that moment, the
 orphan firms his life belief: he did not choose power but humanity. The most
 fundamental difference between the movie The Orphan of Zhao and the traditional
 operas is that it has abandoned the ethic of revenge based on the “blood relatives”
 and changed that “you killed my family, and I will kill yours”, a black logic of
 returning evil for evil.
 In ancient war times, how could the soft humanity resist the shining spears and
 armored horses battlefields? The so-called “lifelong love and benevolence” and
 “love and benevolence for salvation” are only people’s anticipation for peace. Even
 Confucius sighed with regret, “Difficult is it to attain to what is called the perfect
 humanity of the superior man!” Mencius also regretfully sighed, “Those, however,
 who now-a-days practise benevolence do it as if with one cup of water they could
 save a whole wagon-load of fuel which was on fire” Therefore, benevolence and
 love is especially cherished and yearned for by people, and is bound to become the
 ideal way for mankind’s cultural salvation and moral reconstruction of the real
 world.
 Following the will of heaven
 Despite no dominating God, there is the will of Heaven transcending everything on
 earth in the value system of the Chinese culture, which was regarded superior to
 other laws and regulations in ancient China and determine the rise and fall, life and
 death of all things in the world. As Mozi said, “He who obeys the will of Heaven,
 loving universally and benefiting others, will obtain rewards. He who opposes the
 will of Heaven, being partial and unfriendly and harming others, will incur
 punishment.” (Mozi, Will of Heaven I). It means that people who obey the will of
 Heaven shall respect and love others and share benefits, and thus will be rewarded;
 those who oppose the will of Heaven are to separate themselves from others, disgust
 others, and thus harm each other and incur punishment by Heaven. Obviously, the
 will of Heaven in Mohist spirit world is harmoniously interlinked with human
 relations. It is particularly important that Mozi argues that the sign of the righteous
 standard to obey the will of Heaven is that “The strong does not plunder the weak.
 The honored does not demean the humble. The clever does not deceive the stupid”,
 reflecting the compliance with the will of Heaven in secular life and social and political fields as well in traditional Chinese culture. It shows that the will of Heaven
 is not an insular absolute spirit, but a cultural concept with the same orientation as
 the ethic and a concept integrated with the ethic. Lao She, a famous Chinese modern
 novelist, says in one of his literary works, “Everything is dominated by the will of
 Heaven. Those who obey the will of Heaven will prosper, otherwise, perish” (Magic
 Boxer, Act III), emphasizing that everything in the world follows the ethical rule
 that one turn, good or evil, deserves another.
 In many movies on the same of the traditional Chinese culture, the will of Heaven
 is often taken as the narrator to change of the outcome. The non-secular expression of
 secular conflicts in Chinese movies meets the expectation for justice, brightness and
 goodness of the general audience in the subordinate social status. In particular,
 Chinese movies often connect the fate of the characters with the “will of Heaven”. In
 the movie Wu Xia (Martial arts, 2011), it was thundering and lightning when the
 villain fights a duel with Liu Jinxi (the protagonist), finally the villain was hit by a
 lightning. This seemingly accidental ending shows the will of Heaven that villains
 are doomed to destruction. In “Wind and Cloud in Late Qing—One Armed Hero”
 (1993), the traitor Yuan Shikai (acted by Zhao Changjun) was not killed by the
 righteous men, but died from the bell suddenly falling from the beam, indicating the
 punishment by the Heaven for his treason. In New Dragon Inn (1992), the thug (acted
 by Liu Xun) of Dongchang (an eunuch-led espionage agency in the Ming Dynasty)
 was not killed by a sword, but was squeezed to death between two millstones. He
 finally suffered the consequences of his own deeds. In “Wind and Cloud in Late Qing
 —WhiteLotus Cult” (1993), the villain named Zhan Chengtian (acted by Ji Chunhua)
 was spiked through the pit of his stomach by a split bamboo when he jumped down
 from a high platform; in Yellow River Fighter, the sinful Princess Wang died in the
 vast raging Yellow River, implying that the mighty current of history buried the
 usurper ruthlessly. Such plots tell that “good and evil will be rewarded”, and no
 matter how powerful you are, no one can escape the destiny. It is also true of the
 sorcerer (acted by Fei Xiang) of the State of Sirius in Painted Skin 2, who was good at
 witchcraft, sorcery, Taoist and other magic. Neither General Huo nor the demon
 hunter can defeat him, but he was pecked into a skull by thousands of birds
 descending from the sky. It is obvious that no matter how strong the vicious power is,
 it is the Heaven that has the final say. It is of more moral suasion that Xiaowei
 becomes a human as she wished after exchanging her beautiful skin for the heart of
 Princess Jing, but a conspiracy is uncovered: her heart will be taken out to save her
 fiance´ whose heart was once taken way by Xiaowei and Quer. It seems that thinks
 robbed from other are doomed to be returned back. The cycling narrative logic of the
 movie implies that either good or evil will be rewarded, life and death will recur, and
 neither human beings nor demons can escape the will of Heaven. As mentioned
 above, the violence aesthetics in Chinese movies has always been the moral
 aesthetics. Whether the horror movies or the ghost movies, the modern movies have
 increasingly become “intertextual” in function. Sometimes a serious movie is not as
 dissuasive as a ghost or horror movie.Returning to the idyllic spirit
 In China, the religion is a “reclusive” culture while the Western religion is the
 “secular” one. Most Chinese Buddhist sanctuaries (monasteries) are situated in great
 mountains and rivers away from the secular life. These inaccessible mountains are
 exactly the ideal places for Buddhists to escape the suffering of reality. At the same
 time, they are the holy land for them to look for the truth of life beyond the reality. On
 thecontrary,churchesofChristianityandCatholicismarebasicallybuiltinprosperous
 cities. They intendto“manage”thesecularaffairs.Lookingthroughthewindowofthe
 hotel, you often see towering spire of the churches and crosses decorated with neon
 lights in the United States, Russia, and even South Korea. TheWesternreligionhas an
 obvious secular tendency. Analyzing the intrinsic relationship between a nation’s
 cultural spirit and the socio-economic development, Max Weber pointed out: The
 Protestant doctrines are to secularize the religious ideals and its core is to popularize
 the ascetic awareness, that is, the religious precepts are introduced to the secular lives
 so that the lives of the public become a way of religious practice, whereby promoting
 the socio-economic development. Chinese Buddhism pays more attention to afterlife
 and the realization of its highest ideals has the ascetic color. The individual practice is
 to be completed by leaving the secular world.
 Theoretically, it is impossible for two different religious forms to assume the same
 meaning presentation system in the movie. Our analysis on the religious ethics of
 martial arts movies is actually based on such an assumption and conjecture—it
 appears in the narrative mechanism of Chinese martial arts movies that religion not
 only guides the spirit orientation of the movies, but actually can appeal the audience.
 As a narrative object designed to meet the mental desire of the public, the movie can
 be universally recognized only by establishing the narrative texts conforming to the
 public ethics. Therefore, Chinese movies blend the religious ethics with the plots
 rather than directly convert them into violence as Hollywood movies do. The
 religious ethics, while providing the reasonable moral basis for justice, highlights its
 “reclusiveness”.
 Though the justice is promoted and the wicked are weeded out through bloody
 violence in Chinese movies, the movies usually present a pastoral world without
 killing and blood and tears after the fights are over, as a kind of correction of
 violence. In the movie One-Armed Swordsman (1967), Fang Gang, the one-armed
 hero, defeats Jin Daosuo with one arm and a broken sword and settles peril for Qi
 family. He actually becomes the overlord, or at least becomes the only one candidate
 for head of Qi Family. However, with no intention to rule, Fang Gang bids farewell to
 his master Qi Rufeng, saying that he will travel to the remote corner of the world after
 paying the debt of gratitude for his master, and lead a pastoral life together with his
 rescuer. At his words, Qi Rufeng decisively breaks the golden sword in his hand and
 throws it on the ground! At this point, Zhang Che, a Hong Kong action movie
 director known for the aesthetics of violence, has completed his ultimate denial of
 violence on the screen. In Dragon Inn (1967) directed by Hu Jinshuan, after a fierce
 fight, the villain called Cao Shaoqin, head of Dongchang is killed, but Xiao Shaoci
 who wins the fight does not lead the family of Yu to revenge or assault the local
 authorities to regain their lost power. Instead, they choose to withdraw from theworld of endless strives and live in seclusion in the vast mountains. Therefore, as a
 narrative factor into the movie, religion changes the thematic significance of the
 movies and characters’ personalities as well.
 Many Chinese martial arts movies end up with that heroes yearn for an earthly
 paradise with no pains and sorrows rather than the worldly fame and fortunes. In
 Shaolin Temple, Jueyuan sacrifices his love with the shepherdess and converts himself
 to Buddhism so as to fulfill the behest of his deceased master “protecting Shaolin and
 upholding justice”. It is totally different from Robin Hood who regains the throne and
 the beauty in the western movies. After finishing their missions, the Shaolin disciples
 often leavethesecularworld,andevenstoptherevengefulmurdersbysacrificingtheir
 own lives. In the movie Shaolin Damo (1990), the swordsman who has killed
 numerouspeople,whenfacingtherecurrentmurders,commitssuicidetocompletehis
 repentance in the end! In the movie Eight-Trigram Cudgel of Yang Wulang (1990),
 Yang Wulang, together with the monks, repels the Liao armies and kills the traitor
 Xiao Tianzuo. Having revenged for the hatred of the family and the state, Yang
 Liulang advises Yang Wulang to reorganize the troop of Yang and fight for the lost
 territory. But Wulang, determined to convert himself to Buddhism, left his lover
 Ruolan, and reenters the temple for the universal salvation. In the movie Suoming
 Xiaoyaolou (Fatal Fun Pavilion, 1990), the heroin Shan E enters the pavilion and
 destroys the Eight-Trigram Battle Array. After a desperate fight, she kicks her enemy
 Bai Chong, who killed her father, into the bottomless pit of swords in revenge.
 Similarly, she finishes all the earthly affinities and lives reclusively. The real noble
 men take repressing the evil and advocating the good as their lifelong mission, and
 ignore the fame and wealth even they have already got them. At the end of the movie
 Celestial Sword—Nine Swordsmanship of Dugu (1993), Prince Xiahou (acted by Liu
 Ximing) and the princess of Late Tang (acted by Michelle Lee), after the victory,
 respectively throw away the sword symbolizing power and violence and the jade flute
 symbolizing wealth. Though an illusory ideal, it expresses people’s long-cherished
 wish for eternal peace in the world. After fierce fights, warriors always are full of
 complexfeelingsforpicturesque pastoraland their confidantsoncecloselyattachedto
 each other (New Biography of Assassin, 1993)! The “closing ceremony” of New
 Dragon Inn (1992) is also full of spurn to the endless violence! A bloody massacre
 f inally comes to an end. On the silence deserve. Jin Xiangyu (Acted by Maggie
 Cheung) burns with spirits the inn she has made painstaking efforts to run, a place full
 of bloody smell. She goes far away from the desert and the career of killing. What she
 longs for is a shelter with no deception and killing. Religions function differently in
 Chinese and Western movies, the latter of which intensify the violent conflict in the
 secular world.
 In China’s despotic feudal society, it is a life-long pursuit for many men of letters
 to live reclusively or be converted to Buddhism. Meditating at old temples in
 mountains and practicing religion beside the green lamps in the monasteries, they
 lived far away from the social strives and violent conflicts, leaving a piece of pure
 land for the tranquility of the heart. Chinese movies, “dip” in the traditional Chinese
 culture, highlight people’s dream for pastoral scenery and peaceful life without
 killing, war and bloodshed. Such cultural orientation is not only reflected in the
 works of a director, or the movies of an area, but can be seen in movies of different
 regions in different periods. Although we have already been far from that isolated
 and ignorant feudal society, the aesthetic imagination in the movies can be realized
 in the real world and the pastoral beauty on the screen cannot turn real, the
 transcending aesthetics has provided our soul with a place for rest.
 In summary, in the language form of movie arts, the cultural value orientation is a
 “potentialmeaning”undertheplot.Itismoreoftenthannotexpressedinthewayofthe
 “implicit signified” mentioned by Metz rather than the abstract sermons. Whether a
 movie is correct or not in terms of cultural values actually is quite important to
 determine the success or failure of its marketing. How to guide the audience to
 culturally recognize the movie stars, how to set cultural interests for the movie, and
 howtodeterminetheculturalthemeofthemovie?Infact,theyareallimportantfactors
 influencing the profitability of a movie. The movie, in the final analysis, is a pop
 cultural productinthecommercialmarket.Ifdivorcedfromtheaestheticsofthetimes,
 going against the consumption orientation in the cultural and market positioning, or
 deviating from thegeneraltrendintheculturalpsychology, amovieisboundtohavea
 bleakprospectinthemarket.Therefore,howtoenhancethemarketcompetitivenessof
 Chinese movies is not just an economic issue, but also a cultural one.