Journal of Education and Human Development
June 2014, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 459-470
ISSN: 2334-296X (Print), 2334-2978 (Online)
Copyright © The Author(s). 2014. All Rights Reserved.
Published by American Research Institute for Policy Development
Learn Economics by Going to the Movies
Mark Samaras1
Abstract
The content of economics courses usually taught in schools and universities evolves 
from the real economy in primary and secondary education to theories and statistics 
on the function of economy in societies at the university level. We need new 
proposals built on interdisciplinary approaches. Indeed, such a proposal was applied 
in an introductory course to economics and attempted to show that this practice can 
be changed, by using movies and soliciting the active participation of students. To 
this effect, the subject matter was divided into three units – money, society, and 
people –, while the focus changed from a traditional perspective to the acquisition 
of economic apperception, placing society and individuals in the centre of 
economics. The study of movies had much to offer to the project, allowing the 
teacher to present economic concepts as living entities. The aim of an intervention 
into traditional methods was to make students sensitive to important economic 
problems humanity faces today and help them acquire the proper equipment to 
evaluate the information they receive daily.
Keywords: movies; interdisciplinary approaches; economic apperception; 
undergraduates
1. Thoughts on Economics Education
The ways economic concepts are approached in educational books, including 
textbooks for non-economic courses, change from primary and secondary education 
to undergraduate university courses. 
For example, the fun activities used in teaching socio-economic issues in 
primary schools promote widely accepted values, such as the necessity to respect 
public goods, the usefulness of the variety of professions for every society, and the 
importance of sustainable development. 
 
1 Adjunct Lecturer, Department of Business Administration, University of Macedonia, 156 Egnatia 
Street, 54006, Thessaloniki, Greece. Phone: +306977510781. E-mail: didaktiki@gmail.com
460 Journal of Education and Human Development, Vol. 3(2), June 2014 
On the contrary, most economic courses in undergraduate programs focus on 
figures rather than the effects of economic policies on each society; numbers are 
transformed, as they are defined by quantitative methods, into the only measure in 
which economic policies are determined. Indeed, discussing economic education, 
Galbraith (1971, 17) refers to the economic impact of painless teaching, to which we 
may add the fact that many economic books used in universities provide economic 
models that completely ignore the reality of unemployment.
Nevertheless, people are not as basic economic models describe them, that is, 
self-centred and extremely rational, exclusively motivated by personal interest. 
Instead, we observe that the more economics students indulge in their subject, the 
more they resemble the models (Stiglitz 2011, 315). Furthermore, nowadays, when 
students discuss current economic problems in class, some of them often present 
their personal perception without basing it on any given theory. During the last few 
years, as economic crisis has increasingly affected people, the arguments between 
students, in classroom debates, are often replaced by the rhetoric used to lead the 
masses. As financial crisis affects the quality of life, it is even more pressing to 
reconsider the framework of economic education, both in relation to the content 
(what we teach), and the way it is presented (how we teach). In this case, 
interdisciplinary approaches to economics can provoke the interest of students and 
awaken their sensitivity (Day et al. 1997, i), thus broadening their culture.
We all agree on the importance of the contribution of optical and acoustic 
stimulants in the educational process. Simultaneously, interdisciplinary teaching 
proposals seem to occupy an increasingly bigger share in the K-12 curriculum. 
However, at the same time, in many educational systems, the effectiveness of 
interdisciplinary approaches does not seem to be appreciated, and we can often 
observe how persistent educators are in the use of traditional methods of teaching. 
Therefore, subjects fit to group discussion, such as history, psychology, and sociology, 
continue to be approached with the teacher occupying the centre, namely through 
lecturing. Although poetry, fairy tales and music can admittedly form affective 
attitudes, they are scarcely used in the teaching of social and human sciences. 
So, the fact that the affective domain is necessary for the acquisition, 
maintenance, and use of cognitive abilities is completely ignored (Saunders 1990, 64).
Mark Samaras 461
Consequently, since art reaches, in a natural and pleasant manner, the 
emotional mind (Goleman 1996, 559), the use of movies, literature, music, and 
painting can form a learning environment able to activate the interest of students, as 
well as their critical and creative thought2
.
2. The Use of movies in Economic Education
In our days, economics teachers have free access, through the Internet, to a 
large number of teaching propositions, combining movies and television series with 
the science of economics3
. There are also many important studies that propose ways 
to use movies to enrich our teaching methods (Mixon 2010; Braun 2011; Sexton 
2006). Moreover, certain scientific articles describe entire courses based on motion 
pictures (Leet and Houser 2003) or study the national culture as projected in some of 
them (Cardon 2010). In every case, the value of the use of movies as an 
interdisciplinary tool is not only recognised by important universities4
, but movies are 
also widely used as an autonomous course directed “to non-science majors” (Parker 
2009, 130).
International bibliography shows that the use of movies offers many 
advantages in teaching undergraduate economics. It is generally agreed that imagery 
contributes greatly to the process of learning while it fortifies memory (Sexton 2006, 
407), and that the use of many different teaching methods improves learning ability 
(Parker 2009, 130), maintains the interest of students and helps those with a “visual 
modality” (Boatman, Courtney and Lee 2008, 40) learn faster. Finally, movies make 
students participate in class discussions (Mixon 2010, 102), becoming an integral part 
of the learning process; they help them to face questions arising in their field (Macy 
and Terry 2008), and enrich the cognitive side of economics with emotions (Stratton, 
Kass and Rotenberry 2011, 2).
 
2 For interdisciplinary approaches in economics see also Leet and Houser 2003; Sexton 2006; Watts 
2003; Tinari and Khandke 2000; Watts and Christopher 2012.
3Some interesting links are www.moviesforecon.com/table.htm, 
www.csus.edu/indiv/l/langd/list_s06.pdf, www.tvforecon.blogspot.com/.
4 See also http://dirkmateer.com/.
462 Journal of Education and Human Development, Vol. 3(2), June 2014 
3. An Introductory Course to Economics
The process described in this study materialized in the framework of an 
introductory course to economics. Since the prime goal of the course was to create a 
learning environment that would make students interested in the subject, the use of 
interdisciplinary and alternative5
approaches was imperative. In addition, another 
objective was their familiarization with scientific terms often mentioned in news 
broadcasts, and the linking of thematic unities of economics with their daily activities. 
An equally significant goal was the development of their economic apperception, that 
is to say the sensitisation of students to individuals or groups of individuals facing 
problems connected with economic factors.
Therefore, the semester material was divided into three units: “money”, 
“society”, and “people”. The first (money) developed issues such as high prices, 
monopoly, national debt and deficit. In the second (society) the students dealt with 
externalities, public goods, the production of energy, and the impact of economic 
activities on the environment. The third unit (people) focused on unemployment, 
poverty and exploitation, distribution of wealth, and inequality. Thus, following the 
philosophy which places society and individuals in the centre of economics, we chose 
movies that “resonate with students” (Clemens 2010, 562), so that they would 
become sensitive to the problems more easily. However, the fact that the present 
study was not implemented over a sufficient period of time (a thirteen-week course, 
two hours a week), did not favour the extrapolation of generalised conclusions on 
how students would maintain the attitudes they possibly acquired.
4. The Films
Movies were chosen justifiably after the outline of the course was drawn. The 
main purpose of their use was to enrich the course with interesting material, able to 
make students think and to provoke discussions concerning fundamental questions of 
economics. The course planning suggested the projection of an extract every other 
week, to provide sufficient time to develop the theory and apply experiential activities. 
Most extracts lasted from one to seven minutes. There were two exceptions: In Time
(which was projected in its entirety), and Fun with Dick and Jane (which was not 
projected in class). 
 
5 See also Becker and Watts 1998.
Mark Samaras 463
Lastly, when extracts were used, their projection was effected after the 
presentation of the fundamental concepts of the unity and before the discussion that 
aimed at a critical analysis of the economic reality.
4.1 Movie: The Muppet Christmas Carol (1992); Concept: Supply and Demand
Having examined the basic elements of demand and supply, we tried to 
evaluate the function of this mechanism, by adding a critical look, while examining 
some of the causes that differentiate the theory we are taught from the reality of the 
market. We showed a small fragment from the movie The Muppet Christmas Carol, 
based on Charles Dickens’ masterpiece, A Christmas Carol (1843), the novel which, 
among other things, gave us one of the most famous characters with economic 
interest, Ebenezer Scrooge. In one of the first scenes, two of the main characters, the 
Great Gonzo, who represents the author, and Rizzo the Rat, are found in an open 
market place, trying to sell apples. While the former is narrating the story, the latter 
consumes the merchandise, thus hoping to provoke a price increase, through the 
decrease of the quantity available for sale. “I’m creating scarcity. Drives the prices up” 
(0:03:30), he answers when he is criticised for his gluttony. During the class discussion 
that followed, some market issues were developed. There are cases when the lack of 
goods is not the result either of the inability to produce or an unforeseen increase in 
demand; it is caused by market mechanisms (Sen 1988, 25-26). When this lack 
concerns food, we end by provoking extreme situations, such as poverty or starvation. 
It is precisely these market mechanisms, through the use of lawful or unlawful means, 
which can determine the prices, or even the demand, something that is not often 
mentioned in economic teaching.
4.2 Movie: Charlie and the Chocolate Factory (2005); Concept: Federal or Central 
Bank
Charlie Bucket lives with his family in a dilapidated house. In a chocolate, he 
finds one of the five golden tickets that win an all-day tour in Willy Wonka’s 
chocolate factory. From the first moment, mainly because of the greed of some 
people, he discovers that he can sell it and get money to help his needy family. Then, 
his grandfather tells him that “there's plenty of money out there. They print more 
every day. But this ticket... there's only five of them in the whole world... and that's all 
there's ever going to be. 
464 Journal of Education and Human Development, Vol. 3(2), June 2014 
Only a dummy would give this up for something as common as money” 
(0:32:30-0:32:51). Indeed, the Federal Reserve Bank, especially during these years of 
recession, prints dollars to help increase economic activity. However, it is true that 
their main customers are banks. They borrow and then lend to the government, the 
difference in interest rates being so huge that they gain billions in the process (Stiglitz 
2012, Kindle Locations 1442-1444).
One positive thing can be said about all this: the amount of money that 
circulates increases, contrary to the practices of the European Central Bank, which, 
succumbing to the pressures for a tight economic policy, does not “print” euro so 
easily. It is precisely this monetary policy that makes recession worse. In combination 
with the fiscal policy for austerity, it pushes countries of Southern Europe to high 
unemployment and redistribution of wealth in favour of the rich, consequently 
increasing poverty, and finally imposes economic slavery and psychological pressure
(Chomsky 2013). This insistence on the implementation of a policy that finds solutions to all
problems only in “harsher austerity, which will someday, somehow, be rewarded” 
(Krugman 2013), makes manifest the cognitive capture that dominates in the thought of 
those who determine economic policies and influence the lives of all others with their 
decisions.
Although the specific movie extract was used in the framework of the 
conversation on money creation and Central Banks, it also covers a large number of 
economic concepts. One of them is scarcity, since the tickets are limited to five, and 
the number is not about to change; consequently their price may continually rise and 
reach excessively high levels compared to the value of what they apparently offer, or 
even the value they ought to have compared to equivalent products. Another 
economic concept found in the extract concerns the needs and wants of consumers, 
which are not often characterised by common sense. Last, the movie asks the 
question on the function of money, invented as a means of trade transaction and 
measuring the value of goods, but converted into an object that determines our lives, 
leading us inevitably to dire questions and causing a degrading comparison between 
money and the real values of life (Freud 2000, 1).
4.3 Movie: Monsters, Inc. (2001); Concept: Energy
One of the first speculations students come across in an economics course is 
the covering of the always-increasing needs of society with the limited production 
factors each economy commands. 
Mark Samaras 465
The problem of energy is similar, whether it is produced by mineral fuel or 
renewable sources, it appears – at least in economics manuals – to be insufficient to 
cover all our demands. In class we showed the “TV commercial” (0:05:40-0:6:59) of 
Monsters, Inc., a company producing electric energy, which lends its title to the 
movie. The specific extract, showing that the company uses the cries of children of 
our world to produce the necessary electricity for the world of monsters, provoked 
various discussions.
The first constituted a critical analysis of the means of energy production, the 
insistence of our societies on oil and whatever it entails (continuous war conflicts, 
environmental pollution), the alternative solution of natural gas (also not 
inexhaustible), but also the support by some of the production of nuclear energy (with 
all the dangers it implies). Naturally, we discussed renewable sources, which produce 
non-polluting energy. The second subject came from the teaching unit on the Gross 
Domestic Product (G.D.P.), and began with the question to what degree we accept 
environmental pollution in order to increase production, and therefore the G.D.P. 
The third and last question was provoked more by deeper reflections caused by the 
movie and less by the extract itself. We discussed the relation we observed in the 
movie between the bullying of children, which constitutes a form of torture, and the 
satisfaction of our needs. Here we wondered how easily adults sacrifice children in 
order to satisfy their desires; as an example we mentioned child labour, through which 
cheaper goods are produced in Third World countries and are consumed in richer 
ones, the lack of free time taking away from working parents the right to be with their 
children, as well as the lack of places for games, depriving children of the things they 
should enjoy.
4.4 Movie: Fun with Dick and Jane (2005); Concept: Externalities
At the end of the second unit, we used the movie Fun with Dick and Jane, 
seeking an analysis of the problems common in the free market when regulations 
necessary for its control are lacking. Students were asked to watch the movie at home, 
to take notes on anything that drew their attention, and to seek information in 
scientific and journalistic sources, in order to adequately prepare the comments they 
were expected to make in class. 
466 Journal of Education and Human Development, Vol. 3(2), June 2014 
In the next lesson, and some of the following, we had the opportunity to 
discuss different questions and problems that came up with the help of the movie; for 
instance, work without insurance and exploitation of illegal immigrants, the standard 
of living and people’s need during crises to maintain it at a level that they cannot 
afford, fierce competition in the job market, the significance of information and 
transparency in the finances of enterprises. However, the greatest interest was aroused 
by externalities, caused by an excessive tendency towards the enrichment of financial 
institutions, a factor mainly responsible for the recent crisis.
A central place in the discussion was allotted to the relative extract from 
Freefall by Joseph E. Stiglitz (2011, 51-54 and 345). There, the American economist 
describes the repercussions of reckless policies even on people with no relation 
whatsoever to them or their financial products. He also stresses the need for 
regulations (reminding readers of the Glass-Steagall law, p. 52), and finally comments 
on the way banks were rescued. The very interesting debate that followed concerned 
problems of influence brought about by this extreme version of markets, which, the 
past few years, have shaped our society, as well as people’s reaction to the precipitous 
rise and the even more precipitous fall. Almost the entire class claimed that we cannot 
call the increase of the profits of a business social responsibility, and it was stressed 
that the far-reaching repercussions of this new form of capitalism include pollution, 
unemployment, inequality and “the degradation of values, to the point where 
everything is acceptable and no one is accountable” (Stiglitz 2012, Kindle Locations 
256-258). Finally, there was a critical evaluation of the theory of technostructure 
(Galbraith 2007, 73-88), especially the part concerning economic education.
4.5 Movie: Corpse Bride (2005) Concept: Social Classes
In order to discuss matters concerning social classes in the history of 
economics, we showed an extract from the first minutes of the movie Corpse Bride, 
which include the titles and the first song “According to Plan” (up to 0:06:20). There 
we can witness the desire of the new rich merchants to rise socially and 
correspondingly the need of the bankrupt nobles to maintain an extravagant lifestyle, 
although they lack the necessary money. The two families decide to carry out a 
mutually advantageous transaction, which is a marriage between Victor and Victoria. 
So, starting with this scene, questions were asked on how man should live and the 
value of economic prudence and self-control. 
Mark Samaras 467
These subjects created the occasion for the thematic unity that followed and 
was related to the study of consumer behaviour and our attitude towards others.
4.6 Movie: In Time (2011); Concept: Development and Democracy
The last lesson of the semester lasted two hours more than the others, since it 
was accompanied by the projection of the movie In Time. It was chosen by the 
students, who, if they wished so, could also see it at home and could prepare 
questions for discussion. By discussing In Time, we intended to develop different 
subjects, such as distribution of wealth and inequality, poverty and exploitation, and 
also this impressive allegory included in the picture where time and money are 
intimately connected. In the past, I had used the movie District 9 (2009) to discuss 
similar subjects, while now we could also project the equally interesting Elysium
(2013). These three movies contain numerous economic messages and provoke many 
and interesting discussions.
The first subject we discussed concerned social justice, the role of the state, 
and the importance of individual action, namely the contribution of each one of us. 
We agreed that there cannot be real democracy without the benefit of high-level 
education, but also economic growth. For, after all, without the benefit of education, 
with emphasis on human ideals, mutual understanding, and respect, there is a gap 
between technical and humanistic progress. Thus, through its actions, the state is 
obliged to provide social protection and prevent exploitation, help the poor and all 
those who cannot take care of themselves, and thus its decisions should be ruled by 
justice. However, even today policies connected with the philosophy of Social 
Darwinism continue to be applied. However, because people will never easily accept 
the passing of economic policies that will lead to their annihilation, barriers are 
imposed on the power of citizens and consequently on democracy (Galbraith 1998,
49-53).
It is precisely at this point that the discussion of moral questions springs up 
again. The dominant economic models taught in schools and universities leave no 
room for others and their feelings, as there is no concern for public good (Stiglitz 
2011, 315). So, gradually, many theories of economics are alienated from the moral 
principles that ought to rule every science. 
468 Journal of Education and Human Development, Vol. 3(2), June 2014 
Statistics acquires greater value than humans, numbers become the desirable 
target, and finally no one seems to care if economic policies destroy human lives. Yet, 
here is to be found one more contradiction in these theories, since, while they 
supposedly seek prosperity, they fail to understand that the total of prosperity grows if 
the distribution of the social dividend is adjusted in favour of the poor (Marshall 
1885, 31).
One more matter that attracted the attention of students concerned violence, 
whether directed towards ourselves or others, and particularly every form of violence 
with economic origins, that is to say caused by austerity, unemployment, poverty. 
“Violence”, according to Umberto Eco (1999, 155), “is to be found in the very idea of 
profit […]: you must desire what I offer you, not what I have”. The injustice, the 
inequality, and the psychological violence each one of us encounters daily can 
provoke empathy and anger. In particular in periods of recession, persons with an 
increased sense of moral justice and a high level of empathy suffer so much 
psychological violence that it can cause great difficulties in the management of simple 
situations. On the other hand, morality deters people from violent actions. However, 
it is not the only one. One of the reasons there is no mass reaction in periods of harsh 
austerity is because grief, “the last filter of aggressiveness” (Kristeva 2000, 122), 
prevents it. Thus, in the day-to-day life, full of tensions, students, noticing that at a 
national level, social groups turn against each other and at an international level 
citizens of one country blame those of another, showed interest in views expressed in 
mass media on securing peace in Europe. Naturally, poverty and famine are the most 
important social problems; however, as John Kenneth Galbraith states (2004, 62),
“war continues to be the biggest failure of man”.
As the last lesson was coming to an end, the discussion returned to classical 
economic matters, focusing on Gross Domestic Product (G.D.P.), production and 
productivity. During the semester, we examined thoroughly questions of measuring 
G.D.P., which, although considered the most significant welfare indicator, it measures 
social progress exclusively on the basis of the volume of production, without taking 
into consideration elements that determine the quality of life, such as free time, 
environmental pollution, and social contact, thus disorienting not only the economy, 
but also society (Stiglitz 2011, 355). Therefore, the greater “the submission of the 
individuals is to the huge mechanism of production and distribution” (Marcuse 1970, 
3), the greater the G.D.P., and therefore growth and fictitious prosperity.
Mark Samaras 469
5. Conclusions
I increasingly use interdisciplinary approaches in my courses, mainly in order 
to reach affective, but also cognitive objectives. This study presents the way a course 
was enhanced with fundamental principles of economics with extracts from movies. 
Several times the topics developed in class were not exactly the ones that had been 
prepared; they emerged from the discussion and were proposed by students. One 
could see how intense the interest expressed by the students was. However, what they 
gained from the use of movies cannot be affirmed, mainly because our purpose was 
to cover affective objectives, and, as it is all too clear, particularly in the high levels of 
the specific domain, time is required to form and cultivate personal values. There was 
an attempt to benefit from the criticism exercised by movies on social policies, in 
order to invite the students to form attitudes towards an anthropocentric system of 
values, since, in a few years, these students will form the dominant mentality of 
society. The role of economic education should be to provide knowledge to the 
students, so that they may survive in a world inundated with economic activities. 
Perhaps one day they will seek to implement all that we taught them, for as Stiglitz 
(2002, xi), mentions “good policies have the power to transform the lives […] of poor 
people”.
