Healing the mind and soul through meditation pilgrimage: Understanding recreation specialization, attention restoration, and emotion regulation
Author links open overlay panelAliana Man Wai Leong a, Zhiwei (CJ) Lin b c, YiTing Zhou d, IpKin Anthony Wong e
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tmp.2023.101202
Get rights and content
Highlights
?
Meditation recreation specialization promotes attention restoration.

?
Meditation recreation specialization positively affects meditation flow experience.

?
Attention restoration affects emotion regulation through flow and leisure benefits.

?
Leisure benefits facilitate behavioral intentions.

?
Meditation flow experience is positively related to leisure benefits.


Abstract
Meditation has largely been associated with its religious connotation in the tourism literature. The present research steers away from that tradition to focus on meditative practices as a leisure activity. It addresses the literature void by conducting a survey study on meditation tourists who participated in a 7-day meditation excursion. Based on attention restoration theory and the two-factor theory of emotion, this research contributes to the literature by underscoring a theoretical synthesis of the transformative potential of meditation on tourists' psychological and emotional wellness. It moves beyond the religiously grounded meditation retreat to offer a more generalizable travel phenomenon for bodyoul self-improvement. It opens a new avenue for meditation travel by attention restoration through an arousalognition perspective. This wellness-related tourism has great potential to gain further popularity for those who have suffered mental and physical stress from the pandemic and other life adversities.

Previous article in issueNext article in issue
Keywords
MeditationRecreation specializationAttention restorationEmotion regulationFlow
1. Introduction
Meditation (or meditative practice) has long been recognized as an effective means to improve one's mind and spirit (Farb, Anderson, & Segal, 2012; Norman & Pokorny, 2017). Although this activity can be done at home, the literature (Wang, Chen, Shi, & Shi, 2021) has identified that trainers and other professionals can provide expertise to participants to gain mastery in this mental training, which includes sitting, breathing, walking, and lying down to facilitate its outcomes. Kaplan, (2001, p. 483) view on attention restoration further acknowledges the importance of engaging in meditative practice outside of one's mundane activities: he ideal meditative environment is a special place reserved for the purpose and separated from reminders of one's everyday concern.?As the meditation pilgrimage has gained popularity in recent years (Jiang, Ryan, & Zhang, 2018), there is a need to better understand its travel benefits and tourist perceptions of this type of retreat.

In spite of the need to improve the knowledge of meditation travel, the extant literature only pays cursory attention to this tourism phenomenon. Norman and Pokorny (2017, p. 1) use the term argely undocumented in scholarly literature?while noting an urgency to improve scholarly discourse in this stream of work. Also, prior works on meditation travel are exploratory in nature, with emphases on travel motivation, experience, mindfulness, and wellbeing, through a conceptual or retrospective case study lens (Chen, Scott, & Benckendorff, 2017; Jiang et al., 2018; Norman & Pokorny, 2017; Wang et al., 2021). Notwithstanding the fact that these studies build the necessary foundation for meditation in the travel domain, they focus on spiritual interventions encountered at sacred religious sites (e.g., Buddhist temples) (Chen et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2018; Norman, 2012). As a result, findings are often tied to religions and spiritual beliefs (Wang et al., 2021, p. 6); while the activity is often given the connotation of Buddhist meditative practice (Norman & Pokorny, 2017). This reflects a major research gap in the literature. Yet, meditation tourism is a form of wellness tourism (Dini & Pencarelli, 2022) in that tourists can reap an array of benefits similar to those from yoga and other wellness activities (Dillette, Douglas, & Andrzejewski, 2018). As authors of the present research continue to seek a more generalizable understanding of the scholarship on meditation tourism, it becomes apparent that a different approach is necessary.

This research aims to address the void in the literature through a quantitative approach to assess the benefits reaped from meditative practices in the tourism context. Accordingly, it seeks to fill the aforementioned research gap by steering away from the Buddhist meditative practice, which is imbued with strong connotative meaning of religious belief (Norman & Pokorny, 2017; Wang et al., 2021). In particular, this investigation seeks to answer the following questions: How does meditation promote tourists' flow experience and other leisure benefits? What is the role of meditation in facilitating tourists' attention restoration and emotion regulation? Would benefits reaped from meditation increase tourists' repatronage intention? This study takes the positive psychology stance to point to the importance of restoration, flow, and other benefits from meditation in inducing better regulation of one's emotions (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2014) through meditation retreat. It thus improvises a model that links meditation specialization, emotion regulation (Gross & John, 2003), and travel loyalty intention (Xu, Wong, & Tan, 2016). The meditation of attention restoration (Han, 2010), flow experience (Jackson, Martin, & Eklund, 2008), and satisfaction of leisure benefit (or leisure benefit for short) (Beard & Ragheb, 1980) in the tourism setting are further explored. The proposed model draws on the theoretical footings from attention restoration theory (ART, Kaplan, 1995) and the two-factor theory of emotion (TFTE, Reisenzein, 1983). Attention restoration theory, rooted in environmental psychology, underscores the importance of human immersion in the physical environment (Wong, Lin, & Kou, 2021). Such an environment allows individuals to replenish their psychological resources during their trips (Han, 2010), resulting in improved wellbeing and control of their emotions with positive psychological consequences (Lin, Wong, Kou, & Zhen, 2021; Wong, Lin, Yang, & Kou, 2023).

This research first contributes to the literature by integrating a structural model that articulates how meditation could improve tourists' attention restoration quality and emotion regulation through the meditation of flow experience and leisure benefit in the context of meditation pilgrimage. It applies the concept of meditation specialization and emotion regulation (Gross & John, 2003) in tourism research to highlight the meditation-induced emotion control mechanism as a strategy for tourists to regulate their feelings and moods. This mechanism reflects a plausible means for tourism operators to develop emotion-eliciting situations that could utilize tourism products as a conduit that brings prolonged emotional impacts to tourists. Third, it unites meditative practices, spiritual retreats, and leisure recreation (Choe, Chick, & O'Regan, 2015; Norman & Pokorny, 2017) as a stream of wellness tourism (Dini & Pencarelli, 2022) that replenishes participants with a constellation of psychological and emotional benefits (Kazakov & Oyner, 2021); hence, it entails what Dillette et al. (2018, p. 1) refer to as a atalyst for transformation.?Accordingly, this research moves beyond the religiously grounded meditation travel/retreat (Wang et al., 2021) to embark on a more generalizable travel phenomenon for bodyoul self-improvement. This meditation-induced process further reflects an alternative approach in transformative tourism (Chen et al., 2017; Wittmann & Schmidt, 2014; Wolf, Ainsworth, & Crowley, 2017) and heeds the call from Sheldon (2020) to annotate a series of paths leading from meditation to means that could motivate tourists to seek their inner journeys. Hence, meditation pilgrimage moves beyond religious and wellness practices to embark on the transformative domain of mind and soul healing for tourists. Finally, this inquiry brings a theoretical synthesis between ART (Kaplan, 1995) and TFTE (Reisenzein, 1983) by expanding our understanding of attention restoration through an arousal-cognition perspective asserted by the TFTE premise in the tourism literature.

2. Literature review
2.1. Theoretical framework
To understand the theoretical foundation that grounds the present study, this study takes the positive psychology lens to celebrate Seligman and Csikszentmihalyi, (2014, p. 279) contention that alued subjective experience?can help bring people feelings of low and happiness.?The premise of positive psychology points to means that could improve personal traits and mindfulness, and that resonate with the role of meditative practice (Chen et al., 2017; Norman & Pokorny, 2017). Seligman and colleagues further highlight the importance of self-regulation (e.g., emotion regulation) in order to attain an intended level of wellbeing. Although their original thesis does not adhere to any specific theoretical perspective, it nevertheless opens the door for scholars o understand and build those factors that allow individuals, communities, and societies to flourish?(Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2014, p. 13).

To this end, this inquiry draws on attention restoration theory (ART, Kaplan, 1995) and the two-factor theory of emotion (AKA cognitionrousal theory or cognitivehysiological theory or Schachter theory of emotional states) (Reisenzein, 1983; Schachter & Singer, 1962) to highlight the positive psychology garnered by meditative activity. The assumptions of the proposed model (see Fig. 1) rest on the fact that meditative practice requires specialized skills, and hence, the term meditation specialization reflects a state in which a person is fully attuned with and concentrates on meditative activities (Bryan, 2000). Kaplan's ART further remarks on the role of meditation in healing one's mind and body, especially within a secluded environment (Kaplan, 2001). The original thesis from Kaplan further points to the importance of attention restoration in replenishing a person's psychological resources. Here attention restoration is defined as estorative qualities [that are] concerned with being away, a feeling of escape; with fascination, a feeling of holding attention effortlessly by a site's appeals; and with compatibility, a consonance between the self and the environment?(Lin et al., 2021, p. 2). Such a mental recovery mechanism through tourism could promote wellbeing with strong emotional fortitude (e.g., better regulation of one's emotions) (Lin et al., 2021; Rosenbaum & Smallwood, 2011). Accordingly, meditation is a perfect conduit or stimulus that could prompt favorable emotional states through the process of attention restoration during trips (Kaplan, 2001; Qiu, Jin, & Scott, 2021; Wong et al., 2021).
However, ART only offers a rather simple theoretical perspective on mental replenishment, as it contemplates a direct and simple mechanism by which a person can reap restorative benefits through environmental stimuli (Kaplan, 1995). Hence, the theory has its limit as it fails to annotate plausible meditational paths between attention restoration and emotional consequences. This research supplements the theory with the two-factor theory of emotion (TFTE, Reisenzein, 1983; Schachter & Singer, 1962) to acknowledge the meditation of flow experience and leisure benefit. This theory has an advantage over other emotional strands Keltner and Lerner (2010) describe (see also Skavronskaya et al., 2017), as it provides a clear delineation of the role of cognition on the linkage between stimulus, arousal, and emotional response. It adheres to the discrete approach to emotion appraisal as it puts emphasis on how timuli trigger primary appraisals and core positive or negative feelings?(p. 321). In particular, the theory points to a process in which human emotion is not merely a result of stimuli and arousal but also relies on one's cognition (Manstead & Wagner, 1981). This is referred to as cognitive labeling, which reflects that a person actively interprets environmental stimuli (e.g., meditative practice) to label the arousal (e.g., attention restoration) based on whether or not the arousal is favorable or unfavorable (Wong, Sun, Xiong, & Li, 2023). Positive evaluation of the arousal would result in emotional gains (Fan, Wong, & Lin, 2023), while negative evaluation would lead to adverse emotional outcomes (Tye, 2018).

Relying on the theoretical underpinning of TFTE, the authors argue that the attention restoration ?emotion regulation linkage should be considered in light of the cognitive process of meditative practice, including flow experience (de Matos, S? & Duarte, 2021; Wu, Wong, & Lin, 2021) and leisure benefits (Beard & Ragheb, 1980; Serdar, 2020) in meditation travel. In other words, flow and leisure benefits can be considered as what Schachter and Singer (1962) refer to as cognitive factors that could aid an individual to better determine their emotional outcomes. If the person can recognize values reaped from the meditationestoration process, positive emotional valence will follow. On the contrary, if the person fails to identify benefits received from the process, they will be rather dissatisfied and perhaps may experience grief and pensiveness (Cornelius, 1991). These two variables could help unlock the missing linkage documented in prior literature, and hence, this study proposes a meditational process in which the restorationmotion relationship is mediated by the aforementioned cognitive elements (flow and benefit). The authors further argue that when a tourist can reap a high level of leisure benefit, he/she should be motivated to patronize the meditation retreat (Beard & Ragheb, 1980; Serdar, 2020).

2.2. Hypothesis development
Similar to yoga and tai chi, meditation is a special form of leisure activity (Schmidt & Little, 2007). This is acknowledged by the work of Choe et al. (2015, p. 433), who identify that meditation and leisure share marked similarities because they an help people with stress reduction, emotion management and health.?Both have the ability to promote wellness and mitigate negative emotions and apprehension (Thimmapuram et al., 2017). Like many other wellness activities, however, meditation requires specific skills and knowledge. The same is true for tourists who engage in meditation retreats, even though some of them are novices. Hence, the term pecialization?is used to describe devotion from participants toward a specific activity, with connotations pointing to involvement and dedication from these individuals (Ditton, Loomis, & Choi, 1992). However, Bryan's original thesis on specialization focuses on people's preferences and attitudes toward recreation (Bryan, 2000). Resting on prior literature, this study defines meditation specialization as an individual's involvement and preference in continuously practicing this leisure activity.

To understand the linkage between meditation specialization and its restoration potential in the tourism context, this research draws on attention restoration theory (ART), which posits that the physical environment possesses healing power for people. Accordingly, the tangible surroundings allow them to relieve stress and fatigue by replenishing their psychological resources (Han, 2010). As people immerse in a natural habit, they often feel a sense of escape, compatibility, and fantasy realization (Kaplan, 1995). Tourism studies have extended ART in the built commercial setting to identify similar restorative potential in various service and travel contexts (Lehto, 2012; Wong et al., 2021). Accordingly, a meditation retreat in either an outdoor or built environment provides the necessary condition to induce the potential for participants to heal their minds and body (Wang et al., 2021). Kaplan (2001, p. 482) was the first to argue that ne could hardly ignore the Eastern tradition of meditation when considering the active role an individual can play in the restoration process.?Kaplan's contention points to an extension of ART in which mental restoration is not merely confined within the environment but can also rest in the psychological process that people undergo in mindfulness/mental training, such as meditation. This logic is further reflected in meditation training, which can better facilitate one's specialization of this activity, thus leading to a more effective means in improving mindfulness and attention restoration, especially during trips (Lymeus, Lindberg, & Hartig, 2018; Norman & Pokorny, 2017). Therefore, the first hypothesis was proposed:
Hypothesis 1

Meditation specialization is positively related to attention restoration.


Meditation retreats have gained popularity due to an array of spiritual, mental, and physical gains for individuals (Jiang et al., 2018). These experiential outcomes have incentivized participants to continue engaging in the recreational activity through traveling to meditation centers. Although Jiang et al. (2018) refer to them as experience in general, the literature commonly acknowledges that meditation could result in a flow experience during trips (Wittmann & Schmidt, 2014). Here flow refers to a state of complete immersion or absorption in an activity of interest due to full concentration and energization of the activity (Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 2014). In Nakamura and Csikszentmihalyi's original thesis, flow is a crucial element in the positive psychology domain of knowledge. It allows individuals to engage in tasks with full involvement and enjoyment in an effortless manner, and enhances coping ability for anxiety, stressful events, and psychological disorders (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2014). As flow theory gains popularity in tourism research, scholars are paying more attention to trends in positive psychology to credit the role of flow in engendering benefits reaped from vacationing (Filep & Laing, 2019). For example, Wu et al., (2021, p. 228) recent travel study asserts that eople concentrate on an activity and become absorbed in their own situation through a narrow focus on characteristic awareness, accompanied by a sense of control over the environment.?Accordingly, tourists with a high level of flow experience are able to enjoy a full range of leisure benefits from engaging in tasks at hand as they continue to enjoy events they have a strong affinity with (Aboubaker Ettis, 2017).

Benefits reaped from leisure activities, such as sightseeing and other tourism exercises, can generally be described as leisure benefits (Philipp, 1997). Serdar (2020, p. 209) defines leisure benefits as he perceptions of individuals participating in various activities during leisure to improve personal conditions and meet individual needs.?This investigation adopts this definition along with Beard and Ragheb (1980) measurement to acknowledge that leisure benefits reflect how well meditation retreat could satisfy participants' leisure needs through four aspects: physiology (e.g., developing physical fitness and strength), psychology (e.g., the desire for freedom and self-actualization), education (e.g., intellectual stimulation through acquiring new knowledge or experiences), and socializing (e.g., opportunities to meet friends and others). These beneficial consequences are usually well planned through dedicated participation in a specific activity (Lyu & Oh, 2015). The meditation retreat is such an exercise that could bring people an array of leisure benefits. Yet, it is also acknowledged in the literature that low experience could ultimately reap an increased level of functional?and hedonic?benefits?(Wu et al., 2021, p. 229). Because flow is a mental state that describes a participant's complete immersion in an activity (e.g., specific travel activities), it follows that such an immersion usually brings the participant beneficial outcomes (de Matos et al., 2021) that resonate closely with the leisure benefits discussed above. Given the above reasoning, the following hypotheses were proposed:
Hypothesis 2

Meditation specialization is positively related to flow experience.

Hypothesis 3

Flow experience is positively related to leisure benefit.


ART further acknowledges the positive outcomes of the restoration process in which not only do people reap favorable experiences from being immersed in such an environment (Stack & Shultis, 2013), but they could enjoy a higher level of positive psychology and wellness through cognitive (e.g., leisure benefits) and emotional pleasure during excursions (Lin et al., 2021). Such outcomes are often asserted by ART researchers. For example, Joye and Dewitte (2018, p. 8) concur that the meditation environment is one here the aesthetic pleasure derived from soft fascination stimuli can offset the pain that can accompany reflection about life issues.?Other than wellbeing and positive psychology being acknowledged as consequences of restoration in the tourism/hospitality literature (Lin et al., 2021; Rosenbaum & Wong, 2015; Wong, Lin, Lin, & Xiong, 2022), emotional benefits have also been highlighted in these studies to accentuate the importance of attention restoration in replenishing one's mental resources. That is, certain tourism activities (e.g., meditation and yoga) offer attention restoration potential as they can mitigate negative emotions, while bringing tourists an array of positive psychological benefits such as fortitude and emotional stability (Lin et al., 2021).

Accordingly, this research argues that attention restoration could improve one's emotion regulation during meditative retreats, as it describes the person's ability to control their state of emotion (Puccinelli, Deshpande, & Isen, 2007; Walden & Smith, 1997). It focuses on emotion regulation in the context of meditation pilgrimage because the literature commonly supports that such an activity could enable ontrol of one's own mind, words, thoughts, and behaviors on a daily basis, and [one] stays mindful for initiation of every thought?(Wang et al., 2021, p. 8). Such control over one's emotions aligns perfectly with emotion regulation that allows an individual to (re)appraise their emotional state through regaining attention via esponse-focused?strategies, as Gross and John (2003) assert. Thus, this study proposed the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 4

Attention restoration is positively related to emotional regulation.
Although ART does not identify how the linkage among meditation, restoration, experience, benefit, and emotion unfolds, the two-factor theory of emotion (TFTE, Schachter & Singer, 1962) provides the necessary footing to draw the linkage among these variables. The theory posits that a stimulus (e.g., meditation) induces human arousal (e.g., a state of restoration) and then an emotional response (e.g., emotion regulation) to the arousal (Manstead & Wagner, 1981).

A meditation retreat can work as a stimulus to human behaviors. This activity can enhance alpha wave production, which is the brain wave that can improve one's ability to learn, control and regulate one's body, and facilitate mental wellbeing (Delmonte, 1984). Such a stimulus may help to explain why meditation can often assist people to be mindful of themselves (Chen et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2021), reap restorative benefits (Kaplan, 2001), and receive an array of other mental gains (Jiang et al., 2018; Norman & Pokorny, 2017). Attention restoration is regarded as an arousal state in the process, given that arousal reflects a state of excitement (Joye & Dewitte, 2018; Lin et al., 2021). It is a physiological or psychological activation process triggered by an event or stimulus. This definition resonates with ART, which underscores a person's appraisal of an environmental stimulus, to describe how the individual could be aroused to expend efforts in reducing mental fatigue through direct exposure to the stimulus (Kaplan, 2001). Furthermore, TFTE does not specify the specific type of emotional response (Cornelius, 1991). Emotion is subject to a large stream of study that includes a wide array of aspects, including people's ability to control their emotions (Keltner & Lerner, 2010). This research adheres to the tenet of emotion to focus on tourists' ability to regulate their emotions after receiving meditation training.

However, TFTE further acknowledges that arousal alone is a necessary but not sufficient condition to allow a person to interpret their emotional evaluation of the stimulus (Tye, 2018). It also requires the person's cognition (e.g., perception about one's experience and benefit received from the stimulus) to correctly interpret whether or not the sensory input could lead to favorable or unfavorable emotional consequences, as Wong, Lin, et al. (2023) tourism inquiry suggests. Schachter and Singer (1962, p. 381) refer to it as a cognitive label referencing a person's nowledge of the immediate situation.?Accordingly, if the tourist feels that the arousal (e.g., attention restoration from meditative practice) can improve his/her flow state and hence bring leisure benefits during a trip, such a stimulusrousal process is regarded as pleasant; and the combined outcome of this arousalognition labeling would lead to positive valence. In other words, the emotional response is a consequence of both psychological arousal and cognitive evaluation of the benefits of the arousing stimuli (Reisenzein, 1983).

Here both flow experience and leisure benefit can be considered as cognitive factors. For example, flow experience is acknowledged as n the zone?to reflect a person's deep cognitive absorption in an activity; hence, low as a global construct is related to cognition during activity engagement?(Payne, Jackson, Noh, & Stine-Morrow, 2011, p. 6). Benefits reaped from a tourism activity also require cognitive processing to recognize whether such a practice is beneficial to oneself or not (Beard & Ragheb, 1980). Based on the premise of the TFTE that the stimulus arousalmotion relationship depends on one's cognitive interpretation of the situation (Cornelius, 1991; Wong, Sun, et al., 2023), it is expected that one's cognition about the experience and benefit of a meditation retreat would mediate the restorationmotion regulation linkage. Hence, the following hypothesis was postulated:
Hypothesis 5

Flow experience and leisure benefit mediate the relationship between attention restoration and emotional regulation.


Benefits reaped from leisure activities are a salient indicator explaining why people continue to engage in the same exercises (Dillette, Douglas, & Andrzejewski, 2021). Likewise, a wellness excursion that could improve these benefits certainly helps tourists to repatronize the trip (Kazakov & Oyner, 2021). Here loyalty intention defines a tourist's propensity to take a trip again in the future (Ruan, Wong, & Lan, 2022). This logic is largely supported in the literature to acknowledge the linkage between value and loyalty intention (Caber, Albayrak, & Crawford, 2020; Hsu, Agyeiwaah, & Chen, 2021; Wu et al., 2021). That is, one's propensity to repeat a wellness trip is determined by how well the person enjoys the benefits received from the leisure activity itself (Beard & Ragheb, 1980; Serdar, 2020). Accordingly, the inquirers proposed the last hypothesis.
Hypothesis 6

Leisure benefit is positively related to revisit intention.


3. Methods
3.1. Data collection and sample
We collected responses before the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, considering that pilgrimages to Zen temples were increasingly popular, as the literature noted (Jiang et al., 2018). Data collection was undertaken in Donghua temple, a historic Zen temple built in 502 CE in Guangdong Province, China. It was a popular Zen retreat center known for its offerings in the professional practice of mindfulness and Buddhism studies (Trip.com, 2020). Specifically, pilgrims across various demographic groups were free to enroll in meditation programs organized by the temple. The programs embodied meditation, Buddhist knowledge lectures, exchange of meditation experience, interpretation of life puzzles, and more (Wang et al., 2021). Pilgrimages to this Zen temple for the purpose of mindfulness often lasted several days, as attendees were allowed to stay in accommodations located inside the temple complex. Meditation programs of this kind were considered a product of the combination of meditation and tourism (Jiang et al., 2018).

The target subjects of the survey were participants who had attended a 7-day meditation program held in the temple, and therefore, the sample frame was defined to refer to tourists who went to this site for meditation from other regions. Given the limited access to the study subjects, data collection followed the principle of convenience. By obtaining permission from the abbot of the temple ?who was also the program organizer ?participants were reached by a snowball sampling approach. An online questionnaire link was sent to the organizer, who was considered to have a broad reach to the participants; this was thought to increase the authority of the survey in order to elicit authentic responses from the participants. The organizers redirected the link to participants who had completed meditation programs within the recent three days. The investigators expressed gratitude to the organizers at the end of the data collection for their support. The questionnaire was available in Chinese with scale items adopted from existing studies. The Englishhinese translation of the questionnaire was facilitated by three bilingual tourism researchers.

The drafted questionnaire was then sent for pilot testing to a panel of meditation participants who had completed a 7-day meditation program held in the Donghua temple. A total of 50 participants were approached using WeChat groups, with the investigators asking a Zen master of the temple to help disseminate the questionnaire link to WeChat groups. The master informed members of WeChat groups who had recently completed a 7-day meditation program to participate in the surveys. The process aimed to seek feedback from the participants with respect to their overall understanding of the measurement items as well as their comments on the wording, translation, and questionnaire structures. For example, the participants suggested refining the statement  am completely lost in thought during meditation?in Chinese. Other similar remarks were also made to accommodate the meditation context particularly. Further, we tested the reliability of measurement scales using SPSS, showing that each construct had a Cronbach's alpha (a) value exceeding 0.80.

3.2. Measures
3.2.1. Meditation recreation specialization (or meditation specialization for short)
This measure was primarily adapted from McIntyre and Pigram (1992), who proposed a multidimensional scale to focus on cognitive and affective aspects of recreation specialization. The researchers further revised the scale to fit the meditation context. This scale was operationalized as a second-order construct, as suggested by McIntyre and Pigram. A total of 7 items measuring cognitive and affective recreation specialization were contained. Example items included he quality of inhalation was important to me?and editation was an enjoyable thing.?Each item was evaluated using a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). A full list of measurement items is presented in Appendix I.

3.2.2. Attention restoration
Attention restoration was assessed using an eleven-item measure borrowed from Han (2007). It embodied three dimensions (e.g., being away, fascination, and compatibility); hence, this measure was treated as a second-order scale. However, results from the preliminary analysis revealed that the eing away?subscale was not adequately reliable (Cronbach's alpha <0.7); thus, only fascination and compatibility were retained for the following analysis. The eing away?subscale was excluded partly because the original source only used two items to capture being away, whereas the other subscales contained more than three items. Statements concerning attention restoration included, y attention was drawn to many interesting things in this place?and  had a sense that I belonged to this place.?This measure was rated on a 7-point Likert scale, with 1 denoting trongly disagree?and 7 denoting trongly agree.?

3.2.3. Flow experience
This scale was measured using an 18-item scale developed by Jackson et al. (2008). It originally encompassed nine dimensions, including clear goals, concentration on the task at hand, sense of control, action-awareness merging, challenge-skill balance, and unambiguous feedback. The researchers further removed two dimensions (transformation of time and autotelic experience) as they exercised low reliability; hence, 14 items with seven dimensions loaded as a second-order measure were retained. Example items included,  was totally focused on the task at hand?and  was completely lost in thought during meditation.?Each item was rated using a 7-point Likert scale, with 1 representing trongly disagree?and 7 denoting trongly agree.?

3.2.4. Leisure benefit
The scale for measuring leisure benefit was borrowed from Beard and Ragheb (1980). This scale included four dimensionsamely, physiological, psychological, educational, and social benefits. This study operationalized this measure as a second-order measure. A preliminary analysis further revealed that the psychological subscale was not consistent, as a < 0.70; therefore, the study only retained physiological, educational, and social leisure benefits in the following analysis. Each item was evaluated based on a 4-point anchor ranging from 1 (not at all) to 4 (always). Example questions included, editation developed my physical fitness?and editation reduced my fatigue.?

3.2.5. Emotion regulation
Emotion regulation was measured using a 6-item scale adapted from Gross and John (2003). Questions included, ow do you feel after meditation? and were followed by the following statements such as  could better stay calm when I faced stressful situations?and  could better control my emotions?(see details from Table 1). This measure was rated using a 10-point anchor ranging from 1 (completely dissatisfied) to 10 (completely satisfied).
3.2.6. Loyalty intention
This construct was assessed using a 2-item scale adapted from Xu et al. (2016). The scale included statements such as,  will recommend this meditation trip to others?and  will join this meditation trip again in the future.?Each item was rated based on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).

4. Findings
In total, 303 complete responses were returned. The sample size meets the guideline from the literature (Hair, Black, Babin, Anderson, & Tatham, 2006) ?for example, having a minimum of 200 as the sample size and a minimum of five times as many responses as the number of items to be evaluated (Hair et al., 2006). Of the sample, female participants accounted for 56.8%; 55.1% were between the age of 26 and 45; 63.1% were married, and 65.3% had received higher education (see Table 2 for more details). Given that the survey site was located in Guangdong Province, the majority of the participants came from its adjacent regions (e.g., Hunan Province, Jiangxi Province, and other cities of Guangdong Province). This demographic distribution resonated closely with other Zen meditation studies (e.g., Wang et al., 2021).
Results from reliability tests further suggest that the remaining scales and their subscales had adequate reliability. Particularly, both Cronbach's alpha and composite reliability scores of the scales range from 0.73 to 0.90. Construct validity of the measurements was warranted: convergent validity was supported, as all average variance extracted (AVE) values surpassed 0.50. Discriminant validity was achieved, as the AVE value of each construct exceeded the squared correlations between the focal construct and other constructs. Statistical fitness of the overall measurement model fit was also evident, as comparative fit index (CFI) = 0.92, root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) = 0.05, standardized root mean square residual (SRMR) = 0.06, and ?2/df = 1.77. Importantly, although we followed prior research to operationalize the scales of meditation recreation specialization, attention restoration, flow experience, and leisure benefit as second-order measures, we also explored the higher-order measures to suggest that the higher-order measures exhibit acceptable reliability scores, with scale validity also warranted. However, given that the second-order measures had a superior measurement model fit, along with the common practice of prior studies using the scales as second-order measures, we retained this practice in our following analysis.

Additionally, varying scaling anchors were used following the instruction from Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee, and Podsakoff (2003) to minimize common method variances. Results from Harman's single-factor analysis further suggested that common method variances were not an issue for the current research (?2/df = 7.97). Multicollinearity detection showed that all variance inflation factors were below 4.0. Thus the researchers concluded that such issues were not a concern for this study.

Results from Table 3 reveal that zero-order correlations between the study constructs were significantly correlated (see Table 3 for details). By using AMOS version 26, this study explored the hypothesized relationships based on the covariance structural equation modeling (SEM) technique. The researchers further controlled gender and age in the structure model; results suggest that the controlled variables did not affect the hypothesized relationships. Overall, structural model fit indexes in Table 4 indicate an acceptable model fit as CFI = 0.90, RMSEA = 0.06, SRMR = 0.10, and ?2/df = 1.96.
Hypothesis 1 postulates that meditation recreation specialization is positively related to attention restoration. Results from Table 4 support this hypothesis, as meditation recreation specialization promotes attention restoration (?= 0.66, p < 0.001). Likewise, Hypothesis 2 proposes that meditation recreation specialization is positively related to meditation flow experience. This relationship is evident as meditation recreation specialization positively affects meditation flow experience (?= 0.38, p < 0.001), in support of the hypothesis.

Hypothesis 3 postulates that flow experience is positively related to leisure benefits. Results (?= 0.65, p < 0.001) support this hypothesized relationship, as leisure benefits can be driven by reaching a state of flow. In other words, superior flow experience secured in meditation programs fosters leisure benefits ranging from physiological and educational to social benefits. Hypothesis 4 posits that attention restoration positively affects emotion regulation. Results (?= 0.23, p < 0.001) support that restorative qualities derived from the meditation programs foster one's control of emotion.

Hypothesis 5 posits a mediated relationship leading from attention restoration to emotion regulation through flow experience and leisure benefits. Evidence supports a direct relationship for restorationlow (?= 0.20, p < 0.05) and leisure benefits ?emotion regulation (?= 0.49, p < 0.001). Serial mediation analysis for the hypothesized path (attention restoration ? flow experience ? leisure benefits ? emotion regulation) was followed resting on 5000 bootstrap samples to extract 95% confidence intervals; results indicate that the indirect effect of attention restoration on emotional regulation is significant, as ?= 0.05 (CI = [0.02, 0.09]). Results provide support for Hypothesis 5.

Hypothesis 6 proposes that leisure benefits facilitate behavioral intentions. This hypothesized relationship is supported, as it is evidently significant (?= 0.65, p < 0.001). Hence, leisure benefits play an important role in boosting one's loyalty intentions (e.g., for partaking in the meditation trip again). Results from the serial mediation analysis further demonstrate that the serial mediating effect of attention restoration on behavioral intentions (attention restoration ? flow experience ? leisure benefits ? behavioral intentions) is significant, as ?= 0.03 (CI = [0.01, 0.05]). Overall, the proposed model explains between 23% to 44% variance of the endogenous variables.

5. Discussion
The study surveyed meditation tourists who had a 7-day meditation excursion in a Zen temple. This research builds on the attention restoration theory and the two-factor theory of emotion to assess the emotional healing potential of meditation specialization. Results first suggest that meditation specialization is positively related to flow experience and attention restoration. Subsequently, flow experience promotes a higher level of perceived leisure benefits, leading to emotion regulation. Similarly, attention restoration is also positively related to emotion regulation. With an increase in emotion regulation, meditation tourists tend to exhibit loyalty intentions toward the visited Zen temple.

5.1. Theoretical implications
Although meditation has been acknowledged to bring a wide array of physiological and psychological benefits to participants, this leisure recreation activity has largely been associated with its religious connotation in the tourism literature. Accordingly, these prior works commonly mingle the recreation activity with Buddhist meditation practices to allow individuals to develop a wholesome state of mind through proper sitting, breathing, and life reflection to sustain a superior level of mindfulness (Jiang et al., 2018; Norman & Pokorny, 2017; Wang et al., 2021). This emphasis leads to a limited view of meditation tied to the spiritual tourism tradition that puts religious belief at center stage (Chen et al., 2017). Such a perspective is certainly in line with Norman, (2012, p. 23) thesis on meditation in that piritual tourism seems to be, in fact, largely a scholarly creation, as the emic voice is quite clear in its focus on individual self-discovery and wellbeing maintenance.?

The quest for spirituality is certainly an important topic of interest to some tourists (Cheer, Belhassen, & Kujawa, 2017). However, meditation does not necessarily possess any religious flavor. The present research steers away from that tradition to focus on meditative practices as a leisure offering during the travel encounter (Choe et al., 2015; Norman & Pokorny, 2017). Hence, it unites meditation and leisure travel as a stream of wellness tourism that aims to replenish tourists' psychological resources and regulate their emotions via a constellation of flow and leisure benefits during their trips (Kazakov & Oyner, 2021). Accordingly, this research moves beyond the religiously grounded meditation pilgrimage (Jiang et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021) to embark on a more representative travel phenomenon for bodyoul self-improvement. Study of this type of travel activity further adds to the understanding of how tourism can cultivate positive psychology, and it heeds the call from Filep and Laing (2019) to offer a new direction in this domain of knowledge. Rather than focusing on taken-for-granted positive psychology outcomes such as wellbeing and mindfulness (C滵ara, Pocinho, Agapito, & de Jesus, 2022; Vada, Prentice, Scott, & Hsiao, 2020), the current research looks at tourists' ability to regulate their emotions and thus points to an alternative means that could fortify a healthy mind and soul.

Second, this study introduces the concept of meditation specialization based on the leisure literature (Ditton et al., 1992) as an extension of the recreation specialization that Bryan (2000) developed. As the concept rests on specialization theory, which posits a continuum of devotion to a specific activity, it thus offers tourism scholars insights into how specific interest in or preference for a recreation offering could ultimately provide tourists with a spectrum of reasons to appraise with. Beneficial outcomes may enable them to transform a stressful state into a wholesome state of mind and mastery in controlling one's emotions through meditative retreats. This inquiry applies the concept of emotion regulation (Gross & John, 2003) in tourism research to highlight the meditation-induced emotion control mechanism as a strategy for tourists to better monitor and readjust their moods and emotional valences. The authors thus moved beyond the commonly acknowledged emotional response from pleasure trips (Goossens, 2000; Volo, 2021) to find a deeper understanding of the role of tourism in improving tourists' regulative capability for their feelings.

Third, this research adds to the literature by integrating a structural model that articulates how meditation could improve tourists' attention restoration quality and emotion regulation through the meditation of flow experience and leisure benefit in the tourism context. The model also helps to explain why participants desire to repatronize their meditation retreats. More importantly, meditation renders as a mechanism that could promote a conduit for tourists to restore their depleted psychological resources and be able to gain mastery in controlling their emotions. This meditation-induced process reflects an alternative approach to transformative tourism. It thus heeds the call from Sheldon (2020, p. 1) to annotate a series of paths leading from meditation to means that could motivate tourists to seek ow outer journeys can transform our inner consciousness, leading to awakening or enlightenment.?Such an inner journey not only allows tourists to be mindful of their very existence, as the literature suggests (Chen et al., 2017; Sheldon, 2020; Wang et al., 2021; Wittmann & Schmidt, 2014; Wolf et al., 2017). The findings also clearly demonstrate that the journey possesses other mental, emotional, and physiological benefits that could heal our body and soul, hence adding new nuances to the transformative tourism stream of work.

Finally, this inquiry brings a theoretical synthesis between attention restoration theory (ART, Kaplan, 1995) and the two-factor theory of emotion (TFTE, Reisenzein, 1983) by expanding our understanding of attention restoration through a cognitionrousal perspective, as asserted by the TFTE premise. In particular, ART lacks the theoretical power to explain a complex relationship induced by stimuli. Existing research commonly focuses on the environment and its sensory inputs along with positive psychology and wellbeing outcomes (Lin et al., 2021; Rosenbaum & Wong, 2015). This limitation restricts a fuller understanding of tourism-induced restoration qualities in more convoluted situations. By adhering to the TFTE perspective, this research adds to the ART literature through a restoration?flow-benefit?emotion mechanism in the travel encounter. This relationship chain also provides an example in explaining why emotions do not merely result from psychological arousal but also depend partially on how well we can comprehend the benefits of a specific tourism product or activity.

5.2. Managerial implications
Is the meditation retreat a plausible solution to counter personal plights as well as health, social, and natural crises? Bereavement of loved ones, social segregation, and other stressful events have created chaotic consequences for human lives. Meditation-centered travel, however, could bring mental and physical health values to participants; and many of such merits have lasting effects (Thimmapuram et al., 2017). This wellness tourism product thus has great potential to gain further popularity, especially in response to high stress (e.g., for victims of shootings, company layoffs, war, earthquake and storm, COVID-19, and other adverse life events). There is ample reason for people to take a meditation retreat to reduce apprehension and mood disturbance. Replenishing psychological and emotional resources through attention restoration and emotion regulation is an excellent means to attract tourists, especially those who have suffered mental and physical stress. Yet, a meditation sojourn does not need to be placed in a Buddhist temple; there are various locations where tourists can enjoy peace and calm in the city and rural areas. Thus there is an opportunity for destination marketing organizations (DMOs) and practitioners to co-develop venues that could offer such an atmosphere for meditation pilgrimage (Wen, Wong, Fan, & Leong, 2022).

Given that most of the meditation retreats were held in religious sites, it presents an opportunity for operators to provide similar services in a hotel setting. Such a tourism product is particularly suitable for large resorts so that tourists can fully immerse themselves in a relaxed and spacious environment while practicing this wellness tourism activity. In addition, travel agencies could organize package tours for tourists who are interested in this form of tourism practice. Organized tours could feature transportation and accommodation facilities that provide tourists with a comfortable ride and stay without hassle. Special meals could be arranged to fit different dietary preferences. More importantly, sightseeing and other attraction-viewing tours could be scheduled as options in order to improve the overall travel experience while complementing the meditation retreat. Although a 7-day retreat is commonly offered, travel operators could provide more flexible schedules (e.g., 3-day, 5-day, 10-day, or 2-week retreats) to tourists to better accommodate their different needs.

The meditation retreat is a perfect antidote to a stressful world, as it coalesces wellness, spirituality, and tourism into an activity that allows participants to experience flow and an assortment of leisure benefits (Behan, 2020; Norman & Pokorny, 2017). Findings of this study demonstrate that its virtues include psychological, physiological, educational, and social aspects. The challenge for meditation excursions, however, rests on the fact that the exercise requires specialization from professional coaching, while there are not many places in the world that could offer such resources. Cyberspace provides an alternative avenue that could fulfill such a need (Gentile, 2020). Airbnb's Online Experience platform, for example, has already attracted millions of users. The platform offers a wide range of virtual activities and travel packages, including meditation retreats. For only a fraction of the cost that one would otherwise pay for the offline version, tourists could enjoy a chance to chant and meditate with a real monk online via Airbnb. One can even take a editation with chocolate?retreat that brings this favorite dessert into the equation. Yet, Airbnb's platform is only one of many possibilities out there that could break the geographic barrier. Astute operators are in the driver's seat to improvise solutions that could further engage tourists through meditative experiences in a virtual tourism environment.

Metaverse, for example, would be another perfect online channel that could connect tourists with meditative offerings. By combining both online and offline product improvisations, tourists could develop emotion-eliciting situations that bring prolonged emotional benefits to them. In essence, technology provides an excellent avenue that could further promote meditation pilgrimage. It could provide tourists with instructions and means for specialization of this tourism activity. In addition, evidence has warranted that technology has the ability to offer tourists virtual attention restoration and flow experience, which ultimately leads to emotional valence and loyalty outcomes (Wong et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2021). These personal and commercial values could help better justify the cost associated with the tourism product development, in light of the benefits reaped from engaging in this travel activity, thus creating a winin situation for both tourists and operators.

5.3. Limitations and future research directions
This research should be interpreted in light of its limitations. First, the scales employed in this research were primarily adopted based on prior literature. Although they do not intend to assess meditation and tourism in the first place, they were revised in this inquiry to reflect the meditative travel context. That said, both meditation specialization and emotion regulation scales could further be redeveloped to better reflect the meditative setting and activities tourists encountered. Second, this research only assessed tourist perceptions from Chinese respondents, while data were collected from a popular meditation attraction; generalizability is thus limited. Given that there are cultural variations in emotion (Keltner & Lerner, 2010), the authors encourage cross-cultural comparison with tourists from Western locales. Alternatively, tourists' cultural backgrounds and religious beliefs could also play a role in meditation retreats. In particular, the authors encourage reexamining the proposed model by incorporating these and other variables as boundary conditions that could sway tourist perceptions. Given the cross-sectional survey-based approach taken from this investigation, the researchers are reluctant to articulate how well attention restoration and emotion regulation could last after a meditative trip. The researchers believe that future research could evaluate the consequences of a meditation excursion to assess how well its impacts hold after the trip. Furthermore, one of the subscales of attention restoration ?being away ?was excluded due to low reliability, which was mainly attributed to the fact that it was measured using two items from the existing source. However, since being away is vital for the meditation experience, future research is suggested to borrow a scale that contains at least three items for each dimension of attention restoration, ensuring that all attentional restorative elements can be well captured. Lastly, we adapted a two-item measure to assess loyalty intention. Future research is suggested to adopt a more updated scale of three or more items to measure loyalty intention. In light of this issue, we also believe that the flow experience scale could be enhanced to incorporate more items (e.g., at least three items) for each scale sub-dimension.

Declaration of Competing Interest
None.

Acknowledgement
This research is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 72074230) and Guangdong Provincial Education Science Planning Foundation (No. 2023GXJK585).