Neural correlates of meditation: a review of structural and functional MRI studies
Rui Ferreira Afonso1
, Inessa Kraft1
, Maria Adelia Aratanha1
, Elisa Harumi Kozasa1
1Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil, 2Department of Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy, University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Abstract
2. Introduction
3. Evidence from structural MRI
4. Evidence from functional MRI
5. Conclusion
6. Acknowledgments
7. References
1. ABSTRACT
Here, we review the neurophysiological and
neuroimaging changes that mediation induces in
structural and functional MRI. The available evidence
from structural studies suggests that mediation
impacts neuronal plasticity and the functional MRI
suggest that there are changes in gray and white
matter in subjects who meditate. FMRI studies show
that meditation is associated with decreased activity
of default mode network and activation of brain
regions involved in cognitive and emotional control.
Together, the available imaging techniques have
revealed that rather than impacting specific brain
regions, meditation causes structural and functional
changes in large-scale brain networks.
2. INTRODUCTION
Due to diversity of practices, many attempts
have been made to define meditation. Some authors
define a specific technique as mindfulness: “paying
attention in a particular way: on purpose, in the
present moment, nonjudgmentally” (2) or
“mindfulness meditation involves the self-regulation
of attention and involves adopting a particular
orientation toward one’s experiences in the present
moment”(3). Others define meditation by its
neurobiological correlates, suggesting it is a ‘‘a
complex neural practice that induces changes in
neurophysiology and neurochemistry of the brain,
resulting in altered neurocognition and behavior in
the practitioner” (4), that is, in this case technique and
effect become tangled. Some authors, however, aim
at encompassing several types of meditation in a
broader definition, as defined by Cardoso et al. (5):
“Meditation is a procedure which should encompass
a specific technique, clearly defined, involving
muscle relaxation in some point of the process and
“logic relaxation”; it is a self-induced state, using a
self-focus skill (coined “anchor”). This definition was
reinforced by Bond et al.(6).
Even though meditation is currently in
practice, it originated in ancient times, being present
in the Vedas, one of the first manuscripts of
humankind, which has been practiced, throughout
history. Willard Johnson suggested in 1982 (7) that
meditation may have arisen concurrently with early
domestication of fire. According to this author,
humankind had its first experiences on altered
consciousness states while still living in caves, sitting
around fires and watching its flames.
Meditation has been brought to us through
the context of spirituality, embedded in rituals of
different religions such as Buddhism, Hinduism and
Christianity, and others. Due to positive effects of
mediation on human health, there has been an
increase in the number of meditation practitioners (8),
(9). Andrade et al. points out that about 30% of the
inhabitants of a large metropolis suffer from mental
disorders (10). Several meta-analysis have also
shown that meditation can be used for treatment
different psychological disorders with positive
outcomes (11), (12). In this scenario, the use of
adequate scientific methodology and instruments to
observe the phenomena associated with meditation
becomes important and allows health professionals
to encourage meditation practice (13).
Although there may be some differences
between meditation practices such as focused
attention (FA) and open monitoring (OM) and their
correlates dharana (concentration) and dhyana
(meditation) in the ancient texts (14), such
techniques share many similarities. Here, we will
review, the effects of meditation on brain structure
and function, raise some methodological questions
and will not discuss semantic differences. For
example, in cross-sectional studies, conclusions
about the results of meditation might be mistaken for
pre-existing individual differences. Moreover, if we
take the effects of meditation into account, we should
also consider state and trait (15), where state
encompasses the alterations caused during some
practice, while trait encompasses those that
transform baseline patterns and remain even when
the individual is not meditating. In the present
scenario, researches are more focused on the
psychobiological effects of meditation as a cognitive
training than on the reports of the mystical states of
trance described as nirvana or samadhi, which were
precursors for the first meditation studies (16), (17).
The aim of this study was to review
structural and functional magnetic resonance
imaging studies about meditation.
3. EVIDENCE FROM STRUCTURAL MRI
Brain imaging studies show growing
evidence that meditation can induce changes in the
brain structure and thus it can be assumed that its
practice leads to neuronal plasticity (18). For treating
age related cognitive decline and accompanying
thinning of the cortex, meditation rises as a method
that is associated with increased cortical thickness
and offers the possibility of protecting the brain
against natural aging decline processes as well as
some mental disorders (19). It seems that meditation
can act as a mental training to specific regions that,
similarly to learning of new skills like juggling (20),
can lead to structural neuroplasticity. But what is
really known about the causal effects of meditation
on morphometric brain alteration? Several studies
already showed evidence of meditation-training
induced neuroplasticity in some specific brain
regions.
One of the first studies analyzing the
cortical thickness of meditators was published by
Lazar et al. in 2005 (21)(Tables 1-2). Twenty longterm meditators who practiced insight meditation
(adapted form of Vipassana) were recruited to
participate in that study. A central element of the
Vipassana meditation, in the context of insight
meditation, is the attention to the sensory stimuli that
come up during the process. Lazar and her
colleagues found the right anterior insula and the
right middle and superior frontal sulci to be
significantly thicker in meditators than in controls. A
correlation of cortical thickness and the change in
respiration rate, which served as an objective
indicator of the amount of meditation practice,
pointed to the inferior occipito-temporal visual cortex
as a significant region. Particularly, after being
controlled for age which could have an effect
especially on frontal regions of older meditators (22),
this region remained significant. A significant
correlation between respiration rate and the cortical
thickness in the insula was also found after the
authors controlled for age. Thus, they conclude that
the thickness of the occipito-temporal visual cortex
and the insula increases with the amount of
meditation practice. In the Brodmann area (BA) 9/10
meditation seems to slow down cortical thinning, as
40- and 50- year old meditators compared to 20-30
year old meditators and controls showed the same
average thickness. This could be linked to its function
in integrating emotion and cognition. Due to its
largest significant group difference, the study brings
out the insula as a brain region that is significantly
activated, probably in experienced practitioners as
well as in meditation beginners, as it is responsible
for the awareness of interoceptive stimuli such as
breathing and other sensory stimuli. The insula
showed to be active during the attention to bodily
Meditation MRI analysis Main results(meditation x control) Reference
insight
meditation
(vipassana)
cortical thickness Greater cortical thickness in the right anterior insula and in the right middle and
superior frontal sulci.
Lazar et al.,
2005 (21)
Vipassana voxel-based
morphometry
Greater gray matter volumes in the left inferior temporal gyrus, the right anterior
insula and the right hippocampus.
Hölzel et al.,
2008 (24)
Dzogchen voxelbasedmorphometry
Altered gray matter densities in the medulla oblongata, left superior frontal gyrus,
the left inferior frontal gyrus, the left mid-ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, bilaterally
the anterior lobe of the cerebellum and the left fusiform gyrus.
VestergaardPoulsen et al.,
2009 (28)
Zen mediation Cortical thickness Thicker cortices in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and bilaterally in the
secondary somatosensory cortex.
Grant et al.,
2010 (31)
integrative
body mind
training
fractional anisotropy Increased fractional anisotropy values in the left anterior corona radiata, body and
genu of the corpus callosum, superior corona radiata and superior longitudinal
fasciculus.
Tang et al.,
2010 (33)
Shamatha,
Vipassana,
andZazen
Diffusion Tensor
Imaging
Larger fractional anisotropy in fiber tracts such as the anterior thalamic radiation,
cingulum-hippocampus, corticospinal tract, inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus,
inferior longitudinal fasciculus, superior longitudinal fasciculus, temporal
component of superior longitudinal fasciculus, uncinate fasciculus and forceps
minor.
Luders et al.,
2011 (37)
Mindfulnessbased stress
reduction
voxel-based
morphometry
Increase in gray matter concentration in a region of interest within the left
hippocampus; increases of gray matter concentration. In whole brain analysis,
increase in gray matter concentration in the posterior cingulate cortex, the left
temporo-parietal junction and the cerebellum.
Hölzel et al.,
2011 (40)
several
disciplines
Diffusion Tensor
Imagin
Increased fractional anisotropy in several regions of the corpus callosum. Luders et al.,
2012 (39)
Brain Wave
Vibration
cortical
thickness/Diffusion
Tensor Imaging
Increased cortical thickness in the bilateral ventromedial prefrontal cortex,
superior frontal cortex, temporal pole, middle and inferior temporal cortices, left
fusiform cortex and medial prefrontal cortex on meditators. Meditators showed
higher fractional values in the cuneus, precuneus and occipital regions and the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex and lower fractional anisotropy values in the right
medial prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex and right occipital regions
Kang et al.,
2013 (43)
Sahaja Yoga
Meditation
voxelbasedmorphometry
Larger gray matter volume overall and with regional enlargement in the right
inferior temporal gyrus and bilaterally the anterior insula and left ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex, the right ventromedial orbitofrontal cortex.
Hernández et
al., 2016 (19)
Lovingkindness
meditation
voxel-based
morphometry
Greater gray matter volume in the right angular gyrus, right posterior
parahippocampal gyrus, left inferior temporal gyrus and middle temporal gyrus
Leung et al.,
2013 (52)
several
disciplines
voxel-based
morphometry
Larger left hippocampal volume. Luders et al.,
2013 (57)
several
disciplines
cortical gyrification Enlargement in the pre and post central gyrus, central sulcus, left inferior/middle
temporal gyrus, angular gyrus, parieto-occipital fissure, fusiform gyrus, parietal
operculum and cuneus and the right anterior dorsal insula.
Luders et al.,
2012 (58)
soham
meditation
voxel-based
morphometry
Higher gray matter volume in the left ventral pallidum, left supplementary motor
area and brainstem.
Kumar et al.,
2014 (60)

sensations and visceral awareness and therefore fits
well into the meditators’ practice (23). In general, the
team found regions to be thicker in the right
hemisphere that corresponds to its role for sustaining
attention. They suggest differences between
beginners and advanced practitioners. Advanced
practitioners focus their awareness on thoughts and
emotions or external stimuli as sounds, whereas
beginners start by concentrating their awareness on
interoceptive stimuli. In this context they conclude
that other meditation forms will affect slightly different
brain structures and patterns. Lazar and her
Meditation Condition Main results Reference
Kundalini during meditation Increased activity in putamen, midbrain, pregenual, anterior cingulate cortex,
and hippocampal/parahippocampal formation
Lazar et al.,
2000 (66)
ACEM
meditation
during meditation task Meditavion vs Waiting interval: increased activity in the left superior temporal
gyrus
Meditation vs control task: increased activity in the left inferior frontal gyrus
Meditation vs word sequence generation task: increased activity in the left
superior temporal gyrus
Davanger et al.,
2010 (68)
Tibetan
Buddhist
tradition
meditation vs resting
state
Increased activity in the frontal parietal regions, insula, lateral occipital,
thalamic nuclei, basal ganglia and cerebellum in expert meditators and
novice meditators during meditation x resting. Novice meditators and most
expert meditators (skill acquired) showed less effort during meditation while
least expert meditators showed greater activation of attention-related brain
regions.
BrefczynskiLewis et al.,
2007 (65)
focused
attention-tobreath
meditation and
passive viewing during
cued aversive pictures
Decreased amygdala activity and increased prefrontal integration of the
amygdala.
Doll et al., 2016
(69)
Soham
meditation
meditation vs control
task - classify
geometric Figures
between blue and
yellow.
During meditation: increased activity in the left mPFC, left inferior frontal
gyrus, supplementary motor area and left precuneus
control task: increased activity in the left middle and superior middle
temporal, left inferior parietal and left post-central gyrus.
Guleria et al.,
2013 (70)
compassion
meditation (CM)
CM or reappraisal
during film clips
(negative or neutral
stimuli)
CM vs negative stimuli: increased activity in the left prefrontal cortex and
frontal cortex, supplementary motor area, areas in parietal lobules, and
temporal gyrus, anterior cingulate cortex, posterior cingulate cortex,
thalamus, hypothalamus, ventral pallidum, globus pallidus, caudate,
putamen, portions of the cerebellum and right amygdala.
CM vs. reappraisal: meditation had increased activity in the ventromedial
prefrontal cortex, medial orbitofrontal cortex, gyrus rectus, portions of anterior
cingulate cortex, frontopolar cortex, supplementary motor area, midcingulate, precuneus, bilateral superior temporal gyrus and inferior frontal
gyrus/operculum, right fusiform gyrus, bilateral amygdala, hypothalamus,
caudate, globus pallidus, putamen, right hippocampus and portions of the
thalamus.
Reappraisal, increased activity in the middle temporal gyrus, posterior
cingulate/precuneus and cerebellum, bilateral medial frontal gyrus and left
inferior frontal gyrus, pre-supplementary motor area/medial superior frontal
gyrus, left calcarine gyrus.
Engen and
Singer 2015
(71)
Mindful
Attention
Training (MAT),
CognitivelyBased
Compassion
Training
(CBCT)
IAPS database CBCT vs. MAT and control: negative correlation to negative images and
depression scores in amygdala activity.
MAT vs. control: decreased activity in the right amygdala for all images of the
IAPS. Also decreased activity in right amygdala throughout the 8 weeks of
intervention in response to all images and positive valence images of the
IAPS.
Desbordes et
al., 2012 (74)
colleagues argue that the specific thickening of the
cortex is caused by meditation as those regions
correspond to specific activities in which meditators
engage in the course of their training. However, they
emphasize that they expect structural changes in
diverse regions, caused by other meditation
techniques and mental exercises.
Hölzel et al. (24) extended the findings of
Lazar et al. (21). They investigated if regions that
show typical functional activation during meditation
will also show an increased gray matter
concentration (GMC). A voxel based morphometric
(VBM) region of interest (ROI) analysis was
applied, enabling analysis of gray matter
concentration in cortical and subcortical
structures. They tested 20 meditators trained in
Goenka’sVipassana meditation which showed
greater gray matter volumes in the left inferior
temporal gyrus, the right anterior insula and the
right hippocampus in comparison to the other 20
controls evaluated. Other hypothesized structures
tested, did not reach significance. In addition, they
tested whether the number of daily hours spent on
meditation practice had an effect on the GMC. In
doing so, they found a significant correlation only
for the left inferior temporal gyrus region, whereas
other regions showed only a trend (right anterior
amygdala) or no significance (hippocampus). In a
whole brain analysis, they tried to find out more
regions that could also show a correlation with the
amount of practice. This revealed the bilateral
rectus gyrus and the medial orbitofrontal cortex as
significant regions. As the orbitofrontal cortex is
assumed to down regulate the amygdala, it could
be involved in emotion processing (25), (26)
similarly to the hippocampus. since the meditators
also practiced Vipassana as in Lazar et al. (21), it
is not surprising that the team discovered an
increased gray matter volume in the right anterior
insula. This effect could thus be the result of the
similar meditation practice used in both studies.
The structural changes and correlation with the
amount of practice in the left inferior temporal
gyrus first indicates a temporal region of the brain
to be involved in meditation practice. In terms of
meditation, this region is often linked to deep
mystical and religious experiences (27). The
cortical thickening of the hippocampus is linked to
its strong anatomical connection to the amygdala
and therefore its potential influence on emotional
processes (25). The research team of Hölzel could
not address the problem about the causal direction
of structural brain changes in meditators, and
neither could Lazar et al.. We assume that this
"chicken-or-egg problem" could only be solved by
long-term studies in the future. Furthermore, they
notice the different method (VBM) used to Lazar et
al. (21) and point out that their results are not
directly comparable. In summary, Hölzel’s group
expanded the set of regions that are associated
with structural changes caused by meditation.
Very impressive was the finding of
Vestergaard-Poulsen et al. (28), who showed
structural changes especially in the brain stem of
long-term meditators who practiced the Dzogchen
tradition of Tibetan Buddhism, a meditation form
which is dominated by open awareness. Those
researchers applied VBM to the whole brain and
evaluated the gray matter density and volume. Their
results showed altered gray matter densities
especially in the medulla oblongata and several other
regions as the left superior frontal gyrus, the left
inferior frontal gyrus, the left mid-ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex, bilaterally the anterior lobe of the
cerebellum and a small part of the left fusiform gyrus
in meditators compared to controls. As meditation
practice often includes attention to one's own
respiration, the medulla oblongata apparently shows
structural changes due to its physiological
involvement in the control of the respiratory flow (29).
However, in comparison to the right hemispherical
characteristic of Lazar’s (21) findings, they found left
forebrain regions such as the left superior frontal
gyrus and the left mid-ventrolateral prefrontal cortex
to be structurally changed in their group of
meditators. Indeed, this could be because they used
participants with different meditation styles and
analyses methods (cortical thickness and VBM).
Reasoning that a ceiling effect could hide a possible
correlation between the accumulated hours of
practice and differences in gray matter density, they
assume that morphometric brain alterations can
proceed fast, so that this correlation fails to appear in
long-term practicing meditators.
Mindfulness-based stress reduction
(MBSR) programs have become widespread,
especially in the improvement of symptoms in
stressed and chronic pain patients (2), (30). This
positive impact on pain-processing was also tested
for the practice of Zen mediation by Grant et al. (31).
The study team investigated 17 Zen practicing
meditators and 18 control subjects who underwent a
thermal pain sensitivity testing. They supposed that
the uncomfortable cross-legged posture during
meditation would act as a regularly practiced
nociceptive stimulation – and thus would lead to
lowered pain sensitivity effects that could structurally
be proven by anatomical changes in the brain. And
indeed, Grant and his team first figured out that
meditators showed significantly lower pain sensitivity
than controls and demonstrated further that this was
associated with thicker cortex in the anterior
cingulate cortex in meditators compared to controls.
ROI analyses revealed thicker cortices in pain
processing areas such as the dorsal anterior
cingulate cortex and bilaterally in secondary
somatosensory cortex in meditators in comparison to
controls. They demonstrated that the increase of
meditation practice experience is associated with the
increase in the thickness of the gray matter in the
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex. This region is
strongly considered to be involved in emotional
processes and nociception and arbitrates pain based
on affective aspects (32). The authors suppose that
some kind of control instance is settled in this region,
responsible for pain control. Higher cortical thickness
would therefore be linked to corresponding higher
pain control and probably lower pain sensitivity.
Besides the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex as an
emotion related brain region, they also found the
secondary somatosensory cortex related region to be
thicker in relation to reduced pain sensitivity. The
correlation analysis between hours of meditation and
cortical thickness brought up the lower leg areas in
the bilateral primary somatosensory cortex and could
be associated with pain in the knees and ankles of
the meditators. However, this conclusion lacked in
the missing correlation between pain sensitivity and
primary somatosensory (31).
Until then several studies showed that
meditation is linked to grey matter changes in diverse
brain regions. Tang and his colleagues (33) however,
tried to answer the question of whether the brains of
meditators are thus also characterized by enhanced
connectivity apparent by fiber tracts or rather higher
fractional anisotropy (FA) levels between these
regions. Based on their previous study (34)that
assessed integrative body mind training (IBMT)
practitioners, where they revealed improved
executive and alerting attention after 11 hours of
IBMT training over one month, Tang and his
colleagues hypothesized in their following study that
this training would also show effects on FA,
especially in the anterior corona radiata which
connects striatum and anterior cingulate cortex. The
anterior cingulate cortex, as part of the conflict
monitoring system, is integrated in emotion
regulation processes (35), (36). To explore this, they
had 45 participants undergo either the IBMT program
or a parallel relaxation training program that served
as a control condition. The IBMT training is
characterized by mindfulness and mental imagery
training. The training was conducted for 30 minutes
during the week and for one month (11 hours of
training in total). Several areas, , including the left
anterior corona radiata, showed to be significantly
increased after IBMT in comparison to relaxation
training. Furthermore, increased FA values were
found in the body and genu of the corpus callosum,
superior corona radiata and superior longitudinal
fasciculus after IBMT training. They did not find any
gray matter differences in either group and thus
speculate that gray and white matter differ in the time
they need to undergo structural changes. The
authors discuss whether FA value changes indicate
myelination changes or restructuring in white matter
tracts and consider the training a way to ease
symptoms of several disorders with anterior cingulate
cortex deficits. The increases in FA in the corpus
callosum are interpreted as a possible increase in the
interhemispheric connection of the ventral and the
dorsal anterior cingulate.
Based on the findings of Tang et al. (33)
and the assumption that meditation should, in
addition to gray matter, affect white matter, Luders
and his team (37) evaluated a multimodal imaging
approach combining Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI)
measurement with tract mapping methods. They
measured 27 meditators experienced in several
disciplines compared to 27 controls. As they found
out, meditators seem to have larger FA in fiber tracts
such as the anterior thalamic radiation, cingulumhippocampus, corticospinal tract, inferior frontooccipital fasciculus, inferior longitudinal fasciculus,
superior longitudinal fasciculus, temporal component
of superior longitudinal fasciculus, uncinate
fasciculus and forceps minor (frontal projection of
corpus callosum). Grouped by hemisphere
interaction, the analysis revealed cingulum –
cingulate gyrus, cingulum-hippocampus and
temporal component of superior longitudinal
fasciculus and a trend for superior longitudinal
fasciculus. Left and right hemisphere comparisons
showed larger FA in right cingulum – cingulate gyrus
and cingulum-hippocampus but not in the left
hemisphere of meditators. Temporal component of
superior longitudinal fasciculus and superior
longitudinal fasciculus were found to have larger FA
with stronger effects for the left hemisphere in
meditators compared to controls. A correlation
analysis revealed no significant results correlating
the number of meditation years or frequency
(minutes per week) and FA values in selected ROIs.
The correlation of age with FA was significantly
negative, however less pronounced in meditators
than in controls in all ROIs selected, except the left
and right cingulum-hippocampus and left cingulum –
cingulate gyrus. The missing correlation between
years of practice and FA value could presumably not
be significant since the fibers are subject to age
related decline. Furthermore, they argue that the
difference in meditation styles of the participants
evaluated can lead to the missing correlation. As the
superior longitudinal fasciculus passes through the
inferior temporal gyrus, it can be well connected to
the results of previous structural studies that show
thickening in the temporal lobe or larger GMV in the
inferior temporal gyrus, especially in the left
hemisphere, which was also confirmed by this study
with stronger effects for the left hemisphere (21),
(24). As the uncinate fasciculus links the amygdala
and the hippocampal gyrus to the orbitofrontal cortex
the authors conclude that the finding of enlarged FA
in this region is connected to larger GMV in the
regions found in previous studies (28), (38). Fiber
tracts connecting motor areas and somatosensory
areas require further research, as remarked by the
research group. Larger tracts of the corticospinal
tract could be linked to Vestergaard-Poulsen's (28)
finding of structural changes in the medulla
oblongata, since the corticospinal tract also passes
through it. The findings of the study team bring up the
question whether disease symptoms that underlie
demyelination processes, as in multiple sclerosis,
can be relieved or reduced by meditation practice
(39).
Hölzel et al. (40) investigated gray matter
concentration changes in the brain of sixteen nonmeditators after performing an 8- week MBSR
program. Using voxel-based morphometry they
revealed increases in gray matter concentration in a
region of interest within the left hippocampus of the
MBSR group, but not between the groups, as the
control group did not show any structural changes in
selected regions. The changes showed no
correlation with the amount of practice time. In a
whole brain analysis, they could further demonstrate
increases of gray matter concentration in the
posterior cingulate cortex, the left temporo-parietal
junction and the cerebellum, of which one cluster was
extended to the brainstem positioned in the locus
coeruleus and nucleus raphe pontis in the MBSR
group. No clusters were found for the whole brain
analysis after a correlation analysis between GMC
and amount of practice in days. The cerebellum area
did not conform with the cerebellum area found by
Vestergaard-Poulsen et al. (28), but rather to a region
important for norepinephrine (locus coeruleus) and
serotonin (nucleus raphe pontis) production. Deficits
in neurotransmitter production of these regions were
associated with dysfunctions related to behavior,
cognition and mood (41). The posterior cingulate
cortex is commonly mentioned in research about the
default mode network, as it is one of the core regions
and contributes to self-referential processes and past
and future thinking (42). Even though the MBSR
program includes meditation, it proposes several
other strategies that increase relaxation and reduce
stress and can, hence, influence the results based on
this treatment (30). Hölzel and her team realized that
they need to control for unspecific effects or evaluate
a program that is based only on meditation to analyze
effects caused only by meditation and mindfulness.
Otherwise results could be more dependent on
diverging participant characteristics.
Based on the finding of their previously
conducted DTI study, where they detected larger FA
values in the forceps minor and showed differed fiber
structures, Luders et al. (39) conducted a further
study focusing on more sections of the corpus
callosum this time evaluating changes in thickness
influenced by meditation. Changes in fiber structures
of the corpus callosum were also confirmed by Tang
et al. (33). To evaluate this, they measured 30 longterm meditators practicing various meditation styles
and compared them with 30 controls. This time they
extended their analysis not only by using DTI but also
thickness and area size measurements. Area
analysis for five callosal segments was conducted
and revealed increased thickness at the border
between anterior midbody and anterior third of the
corpora callosa which, however, did not survive FDR
correction. The DTI analysis showed increased FA in
several regions of the corpus callosum of meditators
compared to controls (rostral body of the anterior
third, the anterior midbody and even slightly
extending into the posterior midbody, while sparing
isthmus and splenium, as well as the genu and
rostrum of the callosal anterior third). Contrary to the
F Major, they found significantly larger FA values in
the forceps minor of meditators compared to controls
and assumed that meditation influences posterior
parts of the corpus callosum. Discussing the findings
of Tang et al. that reported meditation-induced
increases of FA in the “genu”, which is also a part of
the anterior third and was not found to be active here,
they suppose that the chosen meditation-naïve
subjects of the longitudinal study of Tang and
colleagues might have more impact on the structure
of the corpus callosum than long-term practitioners
who had already acquired their skill to meditate. They
further suppose that different meditation styles could
also differently affect corpus callosum regions.
Luders and his colleagues suppose that their
findings, reflecting a change at a microscopic level
(fiber number, density, or myelination) that was seen
in increased FA within anterior corpus callosum of
meditators, could lead to alterations on a
macroscopic level (callosal thickness) as well. The
evidence for that was demonstrated in their study by
revealing thicker corpora callosa in meditators.
However, this did not survive FDR correction.
Nonetheless it could also support the assumption
that there are more fibers in the corpus callosum
caused by meditation. In summary, Luders et al.
found further indication for the assumption that
meditation could lead to an increased interhemispheric connectivity and a better integration of
information. Their study showed that it is important to
integrate different imaging approaches (structural
MRI and DTI) to find more robust results.
Kang et al. (43) employed a whole brain
cortical thickness analysis together with a DTI
analysis on Brain Wave Vibration (BWV) meditation
practitioners, which combines rhythmic movements
with the focus on arising body events in their practice.
Thus, they extended the changes of structural
analysis from gray to white matter by adding the
analysis of the connectivity between regions provided
by the investigation of the fractional anisotropy
degree of white matter. This was previously carried
out by Tang et al. (33) and Luders et al. (37). Based
on their functional study dealing with the default
mode network (DMN), they focused their hypothesis
on the medial prefrontal cortex, orbitofrontal cortex
and parietal areas. The large sample size, with 46
meditators and 46 controls used for this study, is
remarkable. The authors found a significantly
increased cortical thickness in the bilateral
ventromedial prefrontal cortex, superior frontal
cortex, temporal pole, middle and inferior temporal
cortices, left fusiform cortex and medial prefrontal
cortex on meditators, compared to controls. This
result partially confirmed their previous hypothesis.
Interestingly, they also analyzed the thinning of the
cortex, and found that meditators showed
significantly thinner cortices in the bilateral
postcentral and inferior parietal cortices, right middle
occipital cortex, left posterior cingulate cortex and left
cuneus. This anterior-posterior difference with thicker
cortex in anterior and thinner cortex in posterior parts
of the brain was explained with the finding of Kanai
and Rees (44) and Takeuchi et al. (45), who showed
decreased grey matter volume associated with
increased cognitive functions. Thus, they justify that
meditation practice is related to cortical thinning due
to the enlargement of specific cognitive skills as
attention and emotion regulation strengthen during
meditation. Furthermore, as shown by Boyke et al.,
(46), the increase of grey matter volume is followed
by a decrease, after intensive and long-lasting
training. This led Kang et al. (43) to question the
conclusion that higher meditation experience is
automatically associated with thickening of the
cortex, as considered in many other previous studies.
These thinner cortexes are especially located in
posterior brain regions, particularly occipital and
parietal regions that show regions of the DMN and
thus are connected to self-referential processing. The
medial prefrontal cortex participates in motor
functions and is linked to the movements of the BWV
(47). In contrast, the DTI data showed higher FA
values in the cuneus, precuneus and occipital
regions and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and
lower FA values in the right medial prefrontal cortex,
posterior cingulate cortex and right occipital regions
of meditators, as compared to control participants.
Therefore, higher FA values can be linked to higher
cortical thickness. Increasing fibers could in turn lead
to reduced FA values that link regions with thinner
cortex. As meditators had mainly increased FA
values in hub regions, the authors speculate that
meditation increases the amount of cross fibers. A
positive, but weak correlation between the mean
cortical thickness and the duration of meditation
practice was revealed in the left superior frontal
cortex. Based on a ROI analysis, they found that
mean FA values differed significantly in the left
ventromedial prefrontal cortex, left lateral prefrontal
cortex, left temporal cortex, left posterior cingulate
cortex and right middle occipital cortex of meditators
compared to controls. As this is another study with
cross-sectional design, it is still not clear whether the
effects observed can be completely explained only by
meditation training.
Furthermore, a recent study conducted by
Hernández et al. (19) showed that long-term practice
of Sahaja Yoga Meditation (SYM) which is mainly
based on loving kindness and mindfulness
meditation techniques, is associated with larger gray
matter volume overall and with regional enlargement,
especially in right hemispheric cortical regions as the
right inferior temporal gyrus and bilaterally the
anterior insula and left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex,
the right ventromedial orbitofrontal cortex and a
tendency in the right angular gyrus. Consequently,
those authors confirm the finding of structural
changes happening in regions responsible for
attention control and interoception. By finding
changes in the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and the
insula, they confirmed their previously conducted
functional MRI study that showed activation due to
SYM meditation in these regions, which are assumed
to be linked to emotional intelligence (48), (49). The
ventromedial orbitofrontal cortex is interpreted in
relation to top down emotional regulation due to its
connection with the amygdala and hence could be
interpreted as stronger affective control relating to
negative emotions (50). The angular gyrus is linked
to facilitated empathy in social life, since it also
contains the temporo-parietal junction that relates to
these facets (51). The enhanced structural changes
of the right hemisphere are referred to stronger
connection to the limbic system and the depth of
thoughtless awareness. Further they found
significantly larger gray matter volumes across the
whole brain in SYM practitioners compared to
controls, which was not until then found in other
meditation techniques (19).
Another form of meditation, the Lovingkindness meditation (LKM), is based on the
cultivation of positive emotions such as love,
compassion and empathy toward self and others,
which distinguishes this technique from other
meditation forms and consequently can further social
cognition. Furthermore, based on the assumption
that meditation forms that work with emotions could
have an effect on the emotion-processing system,
Leung et al. (52) measured 10 long-term LKM
practitioners and compared them to 15 control
subjects without meditation experience who
underwent a total of seven hours of training in basic
meditation self-practice. Using an automated voxelbased morphometry for the whole brain they found
out that LKM practitioners showed more gray matter
volume in the right angular gyrus, right posterior
parahippocampal gyrus, left inferior temporal gyrus
and middle temporal gyrus. As the structural changes
of the inferior temporal gyrus were also found in other
studies and the LKM practice starts with general
attention and mindfulness practice, this region seems
to be affected through general mindfulness and
attention meditation. The right angular gyrus gray
matter volume was found to be negatively correlated
with the hours of meditation practice. The authors
explained this by know-how adoption that does not
require any more effort in training (53). The focus of
the study is on the right angular gyrus, since it
includes various different regions such as the
temporo-parietal junction which plays a role in social
cognition, empathy and metallization, as already
discussed in the study of Hernandez et al. (19). They
strengthen their argumentation citing Lutz et al. (54),
who found a greater functional activity in the right
angular gyrus of the temporo-parietal junction that
they linked to interaction with others at emotional and
rational levels. The finding in the right posterior
parahippocampal gyrus was linked to its function in
the paralimbic system and is connected to the
amygdala and higher cognitive centers (55). The
middle temporal gyrus represents again a region in
the temporal lobe as already demonstrated by Holzel
et al. (24) and Luders et al. (56) and thus seems to
be subject to changes in various forms of meditation.
Due to the small sample size and different practice
stages of meditators, this study also presents
limitations.
With a sample of 30 long-term meditators
and 30 controls, Luders and his team (57) contributed
once again to the clarification of morphological
changes due to meditation by conducting a study
about hippocampal anatomical changes. Using a
combination of traditional ROI-based approach with
measurement of the hippocampal volume they found,
through a global measurement based on the number
of voxels in the hippocampus, that the left
hippocampal volume was significantly larger in
meditators than in controls. With up to 15% larger
radial distances, especially in left hippocampal
subregions in meditators compared to controls,
revealed by local analysis to evaluate the
hippocampal surface, they demonstrated once again
that the hippocampus is subject to structural changes
probably caused by meditation. They also correctly
mentioned the problem of other ignored variables in
the lifestyle of the participants that can influence the
result in the hippocampus and impact on the group
difference observed.
Using cortical measurements different
from those in other studies conducted to
characterize the structural changes in meditators
once again, Luders and his colleagues (58)
examined the cortical folding degree, a process
called gyrification, in a large-size sample of
meditators. Analyzing the degree of gyrification in
50 meditators with various types and years of
meditation experience and comparing them to 50
controls, they found an enlargement in several
regions in meditators as the pre and post central
gyrus, central sulcus, left inferior/middle temporal
gyrus, angular gyrus, parieto-occipital fissure,
fusiform gyrus, parietal operculum and cuneus and
the right anterior dorsal insula. Furthermore, they
found positive correlations between gyrification
and years of meditation experience in left and right
lateral surfaces and left medial surface, with a
pronounced expression in the right posterior
temporal lobe and the right anterior dorsal insula.
Decreased gyrification together with increased
number of practice years (negative correlation)
indicated regions in the right medial surface. The
larger gyrification in the left precentral gyrus was
put into the context of regions surrounding motor
cortices which have a relationship with the
interoceptive function of the insula. Luders and his
team (39) interpreted the anterior dorsal insula in
its role in interoceptive function (23). Altered
cuneus and right fusiform gyrus were interpreted in
association with the visual information processing
(59). In their interpretation, they focused especially
on the course of the formation of the shape of gyri
and sulci that changes over the years, speculating
that sulci developed earlier are less susceptible
the structural changes caused by environmental
factors. The problem of the measurement of the
gyrification in this approach, as mentioned by the
team, is that it does not allow the distinction
between sulci and gyri and, for age related
changes in clinical studies, this method should be
further developed in the areas of regional
specificity and spatial resolution (58).
Evaluating structural changes in
meditators practicing “SOHAM” meditation, Kumar
et al. (60) used voxel-based morphometry to
analyze 14 long-term meditators and 14 controls.
They detected changes especially in breathing
related regions since SOHAM meditation
concentrates on respiration while repeating the
word "SO-HAM" synchronized with the breathing
rhythm. Indeed, they found higher gray matter
volume in the left ventral pallidum, left
supplementary motor area and brainstem in
meditators compared to controls. These results
seem reasonable and are in line with other studies,
since the brain stem entails regions responsible for
cardio-respiratory function and regulation.
Increased gray matter in the left ventral pallidum
was linked to the role of reward and emotion
regulation and interpreted as a strengthen in
meditators through its increase in gray matter
concentration (61). Difficulties in the interpretation
of supplementary motor area in meditators were
linked to a possible role in attention and awareness
due to its anatomic localization. By controlling the
basic rhythm of respiration and mediating
behavioral respiratory control its increase in gray
matter in SOHAM meditators seem to be plausible. 
Due to its different meditation technique it can
however hardly be compared with other meditation
studies.
All studies presented differed in analysis
methods, sample sizes and meditation styles,
bringing highly inconsistent results. In the metaanalysis conducted by Fox et al. (62) the authors tried
to sum up the conclusions that can be drawn out of
past morphometric studies related to meditation
regarding their practical (clinical) relevance
expressed by effect size. Conclusively, they found
changes in nine consistently reported brain regions in
meditators compared to controls. These contain the
following gray matter regions: rostrolateral prefrontal
cortex, anterior/mid cingulate cortex, insular cortex,
somatomotor cortices, inferior temporal gyrus,
hippocampus and the following white matter regions:
corpus callosum and superior longitudinal fasciculus.
Their analysis revealed that long-term meditators
received more attention in past studies than
meditation novices. The finding that mean effect
sizes for gray and white matter are different, led the
authors conclude that meditation influences more
changes in gray rather than in white matter. This
assumption, however, was refuted due to the large
sample size available in the analysis. Surprisingly,
Fox et al. (62) showed that experience in practice and
effect sizes are not positively correlated as expected.
The negative correlation between the two factors
supports the assumption that age-related factors play
an important role in the finding of significant results.
It could also be explained by unchangeable
morphology caused by the perfectionism of long-term
practitioners. Mentioning the fact that increases in
white or gray matter structures are mostly interpreted
as cognitive increases linked to neurodegenerative
diseases and age-related decline, they also
elucidated that decreases in the structures can be
associated with synaptic pruning. This process is
characterized by the reduction of irrelevant portions
between the associations of neurons and the
degradation of irrelevant neurons, enabling an
improved network cooperation and enhanced
efficiency that plays an important role in learning
processes (63). They call attention to several points
that future research should concentrate on to
improve consistency in their findings. Among them
they mention the inclusion of more demographic
variation in participants, comparison of various
meditation styles and their connected changes, more
longitudinal and follow-up studies and emphasize the
importance of calculating an effect size to draw
conclusions out of the results (62).
4. EVIDENCE FROM FUNCTIONAL MRI
As the techniques for brain function
analysis and activity develop, so does the
understanding of the neurobiological correlates of
meditation. In the 1970s there was a predominance
of EEG use in meditation studies. While EEG
measures electrical activity in the cortical surface,
with high temporal resolution, fMRI accesses deeper
layers of the brain through the Blood Oxygenation
Level-Dependent (BOLD) contrast. BOLD contrast
relies on different metabolic and hemodynamic
factors as the result of change in deoxyhemoglobin.
Deoxyhemoglobin has a paramagnetic property,
which distorts the near magnetic field, captured by
MR and transformed into an image. Through fMRI
exams, it is possible to measure changes that occur
during meditation (meditation state), usually with the
volunteer meditating inside the MRI equipment, as
well as lasting changes (meditation trait) present in
long-term meditators in which brain function of
meditators during rest or other tasks non-related to
meditation are analyzed with fMRI. In this regard,
Cahn and Polish (15) suggest neurobiological
differences in both the state and trait of meditators
but, due to methodological issues, there are
difficulties in assessing both meditation state and trait
effects. Moreover, Nash and Newberg (1)
categorized diverse meditation methods and found
different frameworks which may induce different
outcomes. In a meta-analysis, Fox et al. (64)
analyzed fMRI meditation studies and found brain
activation in four common meditation techniques
(focused attention, mantra recitation, open
monitoring, and compassion/loving-kindness). In this
systematic review with meta-analysis the volunteers
meditation average experience time was from a few
hours to more than 45 years of meditation practice.
Brain regions reportedly activated include insula,
pre/supplementary motor cortices, dorsal anterior
cingulate cortex, and frontopolar cortex. According to
these authors, although some similarities were found,
divergence is more common. Therefore, it is difficult
to find a common denominator among the various
meditation techniques. Also, as seen before, different
levels of expertise cause different alterations in brain
areas (65).
One of the pioneering fMRI studies was
Lazar et al. in 2000 (66)(Tables 1-2). They performed
two analyses in five Kundalini practitioners. The
volunteers were told to meditate (mantra) during the
exam and were compared with a control epoch.
Authors observed increasing activity during
meditation in putamen, midbrain, pregenual, anterior
cingulate cortex and hippocampal/parahippocampal
formation. When comparing steady-state meditation
(the last 2 min of meditation periods) with meditation
induction (the first 2 min of meditation periods), the
authors describe activation in prefrontal, parietal and
temporal cortices, precentral and postcentral gyri,
and hippocampal/parahippocampal formation.
Although the sample was small and there was no
control group, Lazar and colleagues opened new
reads for the study of brain changes promoted by
meditation.
As seen in Kabat-Zinn (2), Bishop et al.(3),
Cardoso et al. (5), attention is an important task
required during meditation. Furthermore, prefrontal
lobe areas are associated with attention and other
executive functions (67). Thereby, the activation of
some areas in the prefrontal lobe of people during
meditation is expected. It was what Davanger and
colleagues (68) found in meditators. Authors
compared Acem meditation (a mantra-based
meditation) in advanced male practitioners with
meditation-like concentrative tasks and relaxation as
a control task. In order to discriminate neuronal
activation of relaxed focus of attention from those
activated due to language (meditation sound),
meditators performed three control tasks: pseudo
word repetition, word sequence generation and
relaxation. Results pointed to significant activation
during meditation task in the left superior temporal
gyrus, left precentral gyrus when compared to waiting
intervals. However, when compared to waiting
intervals, the control task exhibited bilateral temporal
lobe activation in the auditory cortex (verbal activity),
bilateral cluster extending in the medial frontal and
inferior frontal gyri (relaxation task), bilateral frontal
lobe/anterior cingulum and bilateral parietal lobe
(word sequence generation). To differentiate areas
activated by meditation from those areas related to
control tasks, continuous meditation was contrasted
with the three control tasks. Davanger and
colleagues detected an activated area during
meditation in the left inferior frontal gyrus when
compared to the three controls tasks, and in the left
superior temporal gyrus when meditation was
compared to the word sequence generation task.
Interestingly, the authors showed that meditation has
specific patterns of brain activation that distinguish it
from concentrative or relaxation tasks. Regarding
focused attention network, Doll et al. (69)
demonstrated activation in the superior and middle
frontal gyrus of meditators in a focused attention-tobreathing task during an emotional stimulation.
Additionally, Brefczynski-Lewis et al (65) showed
activation in attention-related regions comparing
meditation versus rest condition in a functional MRI.
The activated regions included frontal parietal
regions, insula, lateral occipital, thalamic nuclei,
basal ganglia and cerebellar regions. In this study,
Brefczynski-Lewis and team, compared expert
meditators (10,000-54,000 hours of practice) to
novice meditators (one week of practice). Both
groups had activation of attention-related brain
regions (as seen above). However, when expert
meditators were divided into most hours of practice
(44,000 mean hours) and least hours of practice
(19,000 mean hours), the result resembled an
inverted U-shape, showing less effort in novice
(learning the skill), greater levels of effort in
meditators with average of 19,000 h of practice and
less effort in expert meditators with 44,000 average
hours of practice (skill acquired).
In a non-controlled study, Guleria et al. (70)
compared meditation versus a control task during
fMRI. Meditation task yielded activation in the left
medial prefrontal cortex, left inferior frontal gyrus,
supplementary motor area and left precuneus. On
the other hand, control task lead to activation in the
left middle and superior middle temporal, left inferior
parietal, and left post-central gyrus. Similarly, Engen
and Singer (71) observed more positive affect and
emotion regulation due to Compassion meditation
training. In their study, meditators were scanned
during short film clips with negative and neutral
stimuli. Participants were asked to perform
compassion meditation (CM) or reappraisal
(condition that resembles compassion - for control
task). Regarding CM versus negative stimuli,
activated areas were observed in portions of left
prefrontal cortex and frontal cortex, supplementary
motor area, areas in parietal lobules, and temporal
gyrus, portions of the anterior cingulate cortex,
posterior cingulate cortex, some portions of the
thalamus, hypothalamus, ventral pallidum, globus
pallidus, caudate, putamen, portions of the
cerebellum and right amygdala. In the contrast
between CM and reappraisal, CM exhibited higher
activation in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex,
medial orbitofrontal cortex, gyrus rectus, portions of
anterior cingulate cortex, frontopolar cortex,
supplementary motor area, mid-cingulate,
precuneus, bilateral superior temporal gyrus and
inferior frontal gyrus/operculum, right fusiform gyrus,
bilateral amygdala, hypothalamus, caudate, globus
pallidus, putamen, right hippocampus and portions of
the thalamus. Reappraisal, for its part, showed higher
activation in portions of the middle temporal gyrus,
posterior cingulate/precuneus and cerebellum,
bilateral middle frontal gyrus and left inferior frontal
gyrus, pre- supplementary motor area /medial
superior frontal gyrus, left calcarine gyrus. Because
several areas in the left hemisphere and prefrontal
cortex exhibited higher activation in these studies,
meditation seems to develop positive affect, positive
emotions and happiness, as those feelings are
associated with the left hemisphere and prefrontal
cortex (72), (73).
Desbordes et al. (74) investigated
amygdala response to emotional stimuli of meditators
(in which images from the IAPS database were
presented to the subjects) compared to a control
group. Subjects were randomized into three groups:
Mindful Attention Training (MAT), Cognitively-Based
Compassion Training (CBCT) and active control
intervention. The CBCT group showed negative
correlation in amygdala activation to negative images
and depression scores. The MAT group showed
decreased BOLD signal change in the right amygdala
when compared to control for all images of the IAPS.
This group also exhibited significant decrease in
BOLD signal in the right amygdala throughout the
eight weeks of intervention in response to all images
and positive valence images of the IAPS. Authors
believe that this effect of meditation training on
amygdala activation (emotion regulation) is due to
improvement in attentional skills, an essential
component of meditation. The amygdala is known to
play an important role in emotions, threat and stress.
Hözel et al. (40) found a positive correlation between
stress and gray matter density of the amygdala
following MBSR program. In their study, participants
(all of them reporting high levels of stress) underwent
eight weeks of MBSR. At the end of the 8-week stress
reduction training, there were decreases in both
perceived stress and gray matter density in the right
amygdala. Therefore, meditation plays an important
role in emotion and stress management. King et al.
(75), reported altered default-mode network (DMN) in
16 weeks of Mindfulness-based Exposed Therapy
(MBET) for combat veterans with posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD). Authors compared two
groups: MBET and active control group therapy and
observed increased PCC connectivity with bilateral
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and with the dorsal
anterior cingulate cortex, increased connectivity
between the left amygdala and left hippocampus and
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex following MBET.
Regarding the active control group, increased postposterior cingulate cortex connectivity with bilateral
precuneus and left cuneus were shown. In practice,
the use of meditation can be interesting in the anxiety
disorders context.
Taylor et al. (76) investigated resting state
of experienced meditators compared to a novice
group. Participants were asked to observe a cross
placed centrally on a screen during an fMRI. Results
pointed to increased activity for beginners, between
the dorso-medial prefrontal cortex and left inferior
parietal lobe, right inferolateral temporal cortex and
left parahippocampal gyrus. Also, beginners showed
stronger correlations between left inferior parietal
lobe and precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex, right
parahippocampal gyrus, left inferolateral temporal
cortex and left parahippocampal gyrus;
precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex and left inferior
parietal lobe, dorsomedial prefrontal cortex and left
inferior parietal lobe, dorsomedial prefrontal cortex
and ventromedial prefrontal cortex, ventromedial
prefrontal cortex and right inferolateral temporal
cortex. All these regions are associated with DMN.
Significant correlations were shown for experienced
meditators between the ventro-medial prefrontal
cortex and dorso-medial prefrontal cortex, right
inferolateral temporal cortex and left
parahippocampal gyrus, as well as between the right
inferior parietal lobe and precuneus/posterior
cingulate cortex, dorsomedial prefrontal cortex and
left inferior parietal lobe; right inferior parietal lobe,
precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex, dorsomedial
prefrontal cortex and precuneus/posterior cingulate
cortex. Finally, hours of meditation correlated
negatively with activation in dorsomedial prefrontal
cortex – ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Because of
the attention training of experienced practitioners,
meditation seems to be associated with weaker
activity in DMN, suggesting increased present
moment awareness, since DMN is involved in
cognitive elaboration of mental events such as
autobiographical memory and thinking about the
future. Also, sustained attention may be related to
brain efficiency in meditators. Kozasa et al. (77)
showed greater activity in the right medial frontal
gyrus, middle temporal gyrus, precentral and
postcentral gyri and the lentiform nucleus in nonmeditators compared to meditators in an attentional
and impulse control task (Stroop Word-Color Task)
during fMRI. In all these cases differences in brain
activity was demonstrated even outside meditation
practice.
According to the definition of meditation
(see the Introduction section), the “present moment”
is an essential characteristic of meditation. When
individuals are involved in cognitive elaboration of
mental events – therefore not in the present moment
– the DMN is more active. The default mode network
is a group of brain regions which has a self-referential
nature including the medial prefrontal cortex, the
precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex, the inferior
parietal lobule, the lateral temporal cortex, and the
hippocampal formation. It can be considered as the
baseline state of the human brain in internal modes
of cognition. DMN is active when individuals are
engaged in internally focused tasks such as
autobiographical memory retrieval, thinking about the
future, and taking perspectives of others. It can be
divided into subsystems: the medial temporal lobe
subsystem provides information from memories and
associations that allows mental simulation while the
medial prefrontal subsystem enables the
construction of self-relevant mental simulations.
These two subsystems converge on the posterior
cingulate cortex. The default network may contribute
to the use of past experiences to plan for the future
and maximize the experience of not being engaged
by the external world (78), (79).
DMN activity is reduced in goal-directed
tasks in healthy individuals. It is an interesting
candidate as a neurobiological representation of
mind-wandering. Mind-wandering is considered one
of the core elements of a sense of self. It is
spontaneous, related to internal mental process
which one can be unaware of and is difficult to control
or replicate (80). It may indicate the existence of an
organized, baseline default mode of brain function,
suspended during non-self-referential activities (78).
According to some researchers, activity in
DMN may reflect mind-wandering; activity in this
network may reflect enhanced vigilance in relation to
external environment or a combination of both (83).
Reduced BOLD response of the DMN regions is
observed during cognitive tasks (81), (82), (83).
Meditation is a mental training which results in
emotional regulation and attention, body awareness,
and change in self-perspective (40), (84).
The subtraction of meditation from a control
task condition showed decreased activity in DMN
regions probably due to reduced mind-wandering, in
an activation likelihood estimation (ALE) metaanalysis of meditation studies. Meditation-related
negative signal changes were found in the fusiform,
angular, and middle temporal gyri (right hemisphere)
and in medial structures of the precuneus and the
superior medial gyrus. Angular gyrus, precuneus and
middle temporal gyrus belongs to the DMN.
Precuneus is associated with self-referential mode
and reduction in its activation during meditation is
expected because this practice decreases this mode
(85).
An fMRI study used a meditative condition
intercalated with a lexical decision task, while
comparing regular Zen practitioners and matched
control subjects. Zen meditation is related to
awareness with regulation of attention, bodily posture
and reduced conceptual content. In that study, Zen
meditators displayed a reduced duration of neural
response associated with conceptual processing in
DMN regions, suggesting meditation may improve
the ability to regulate spontaneous mental processing
(86).
Regarding focused attention meditation
and DMN regions, internal and external focus of
attention were compared, as well as the different
phases of a meditation: mindful attention, mindwandering and refocusing. Participants were trained
for few days in two different meditation focuses:
external (focused on a sound) and internal (focused
on breath). After that, they performed meditation
during fMRI scanning. At pseudorandom intervals,
participants were asked if they had been engaged
exclusively on the task or if they had been distracted.
During mindful attention, DMN brain regions showed
significantly less neural activation compared to mindwandering. DMN exhibited reduced activity during
meditation task. Posterior cingulate cortex showed
stronger deactivation during internal attention
compared to external attention (87). Similarly, in a
cross-sectional study, assessing brain network
during meditation, Hasenkamp and Barsalou (88)
demonstrated activity in the executive network
regions in meditators. Focused meditation is an
activity in which attentional networks are involved.
However, during meditation, moments of distraction
are common. In this fMRI study, volunteers were
examined during a resting state and during
meditation. They were instructed to press a button
every time they perceived themselves distracted.
Results revealed activity in the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex during focused attention. In high practice
meditators, there was also stronger activation in the
right insula, left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the
mid-cingulate gyrus as well as reduced functional
connectivity between the right dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex and cuneus and middle occipital gyrus. When
participants were mind-wandering, activity was
detected in areas related to DMN (ventromedial
prefrontal cortex, bilateral posterior cingulate cortex).
In this way, meditation is related to connectivity within
attentional network (present moment awareness)
(88).
During resting-state, long-term mindfulness
meditators (MM) and control participants were
scanned. MM were also examined during meditation
practice. Analyses on functional connectivity within
and between DMN and visual network resulted in an
increase in functional connectivity between the two
networks in MM compared to controls; functional
connectivity within both networks were higher in the
control group compared to the MM group; functional
connectivity between DMN and visual network was
reduced during meditation compared to resting-state
and a negative correlation was found between DMN
functional connectivity and meditation expertise (89).
In another study, the MM group exhibited greater
visual cortex responsivity and weaker negative
responses in DMN areas during a visual recognition
memory task. Regarding behavioral performance,
MM were faster than controls. Long term meditators
expressed opposite changes in the visual and DMN
during rest and task. Therefore, unlike mindwandering, meditation is a skill associated with
“present moment” which recruits attentional related
areas.
Few studies evaluate the DMN during an
attention task. In a study comparing regular
meditators and non-meditators in the Stroop WordColor Task (SWCT), participants were instructed to
name the color of single words during an MRI scan.
The activity in the precuneus/posterior cingulate
cortex contained information to predict the activity in
the right lateral parietal cortex and the accuracy in
this prediction was higher in regular meditators than
in the other group. This result may be related to a
stronger link between these regions and meditators.
As non-meditators have more distraction during
attention task, functional differences in DMN
connectivity may be present during the attention task
when non-meditators are compared to meditators
(90).
5. CONCLUSION
The use of different structural analyses
methods such as cortical thickness, voxel based
morphometry, gray matter volume and fractional
anisotropy in the studies hinders the comparison
among them but, at the same time, expands the
possibility to analyze structural brain morphometry. It
is essential that future studies pay attention to the
various approaches if they want their results to be
comparable. The implementation of different study
designs that differ in the sample size, in the
experience of the subjects considered and meditation
methods, makes it difficult to draw a stringent
conclusion. Other variables correlated to the
structural changes make it even more difficult.
Therefore it is important to run replication studies to
further strengthen the results detected. Functional
MRI studies revealed the involvement of brain
regions related to attention, inhibition, emotional
experience, as well as the DMN. Nevertheless, there
is undisputably strong evidence that the general
regular practice of mental exercises indeed leads to
changes in large scale brain networks rather than
only in specific regions. However, despite similar
techniques, researchers cannot control what each
participant is going through during its practice, since
personal experience is hard to be measured. Crosssectional studies cannot draw conclusions about
causal inferences. Therefore, longitudinal studies
that can evaluate the structural and functional
changes over a longer period should also be
expanded. This could be done, for example, by
following participants several times during months or
years of meditation practice, and thus confirm a
causal inference with more accuracy and reliability.
This could help to evaluate which functional and
structural correlates exist prior to meditation practice,
and whether neurophysiological changes are directly
associated with it. Finally, behavioral and well-being
consequences for the participants brought about by
meditation practice should be better evaluated for
researchers to draw a conclusion on the effects of
brain changes. It is also important to keep in mind
that due to the heterogeneity of the studies it is
difficult to reach a general conclusion, and that the
various types of meditation may cause different
structural changes. There are also uncontrolled
studies, small groups, and other methodological
failures which weaken the potential of the
technological resources available through imaging
exams to detect actual meditation effects on the
brain.
