Cancer, cognitive impairment, and meditationKELLY  A.  BIEGLER1, M.  ALEJANDRO CHAOUL2,3& LORENZO  COHEN1,31Department of Behavioral Science, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas,2The Universityof Texas Medical School at Houston, The John P. McGovern, M.D., Center for Health, Humanities, and the Human Spirit,Houston, Texas and3Department of Palliative Care & Rehabilitation Medicine, and the Integrative Medicine Program TheUniversity of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TexasAbstractBackground and objectives.Cancer-related cognitive impairment has been acknowledged as a substantial limiting factor inquality  of  life  among  cancer  patients  and  survivors.  In  addition  to  deficits  on  behavioral  measures,  abnormalities  inneurologic structure and function have been reported. In this paper, we review findings from the literature on cognitiveimpairment and cancer, potential interventions, meditation and cognitive function, and meditation and cancer. In addition,we offer our hypotheses on how meditation practice may help to alleviate objective and subjective cognitive function, as wellas the advantages of incorporating a meditation program into the treatment of cancer patients and survivors for cancer-related  cognitive  deficits.Findings.Various  factors  have  been  hypothesized  to  play  a  role  in  cancer-related  cognitiveimpairment including chemotherapy, reduced hormone levels, proinflammatory immune response, fatigue, and distress.Pharmacotherapies such as methylphenidate or modafinil have been suggested to alleviate cognitive deficits. While initialreports suggest they are effective, some pharmacotherapies have side effects and may not relieve other symptoms associatedwith multimodal cancer treatment including sleep disturbance, nausea and pain. Several recent studies investigating theeffects of meditation programs have reported behavioral and corresponding neurophysiological modulations that may beparticularly effective in alleviating cancer-related cognitive impairment. Such programs also have been shown to reducestress, fatigue, nausea and pain, and improve mood and sleep quality.Conclusions.With the increasing success of cancertreatment and the ability to return to previous family, social, and work activities, symptom management and quality of lifeare an essential part of survivorship. We propose that meditation may help to improve cancer related cognitive dysfunction,alleviate other cancer-related sequelae, and should be fully investigated as an adjuvant to cancer treatment.Cancer  and  its  treatment are  often  associated  withvarious physical and psychological side effects (e.g.,nausea, fatigue, immune dysfunction, stress, depres-sion,  and  sleep  disturbance)  that  can  range  frommild  to  debilitating  depending  on  several  factorssuch  as  the  type  of  cancer,  stage,  and  treatment.Recently,   reports   of   cognitive   impairment,   bothobjective and subjective, have increased in frequencyin both cancer patients and survivors. The majorityof  reports  have  focused  on  women  with  breastcancer,  although  cognitive  impairment  has  beenfound in patients with other types of cancer includ-ing lung cancer and malignant glioma [1]. Cancer-related cognitive dysfunction has been attributed tofactors  such  as  chemotherapy,  hormone  therapy(e.g.,  Tamoxifen  or  Aromatase  Inhibitors),  fatigue,mood disturbance (especially for subjective cognitiveimpairment),  and  cancer  itself,  even  without  evi-dence   of   metastases   or   a   primary   brain   tumordiagnosis  [1]  (For  reviews  see  [25]).  Particularlyin  populations  found  to  have  a  high  long-termsurvival rate (e.g., breast cancer), cognitive impair-ment  can  have  a  substantial  negative  impact  onquality of life. In fact, reports from the President’sCancer Panel and the National Coalition for CancerSurvivorship [6,7] indicate that both cancer patientsand  survivors  have  identified  cognitive  impairmentas  a  significant  factor  in  preventing  the  ability  tofunction  in  family,  social,  and  career-related  activ-ities.As cancer-related cognitive impairment continuesto  gain  recognition,  pharmacotherapy,  based  onother  diseases  or  disorders,  has  been  indicated  tohelp  improve  cognitive  function  [811].  As  will  be
further discussed in subsequent sections, the use ofpharmacotherapy may not be optimal in many casesas  some  pharmacologic  treatments  are  unable  toremediate  other  side  effects  and  can  be  contra-indicated in some patients. Further investigation ofbehavioral  interventions  would  provide  a  valuableaddition to this area of research as they may promotelong-term  cost  effectiveness  of  care  [12,13]  andcould  provide  social  support  and  a  sense  of  selfefficacy  (from  engaging  in  healthy  behaviors)  [14]relative to pharmacotherapy alone.Based  on  the  incidence  and  concern  of  cancer-related  cognitive impairment,  the  benefits  of  beha-vioral  interventions  that  could  improve  cognitivefunction,  in  addition  to  alleviating  other  cancer-related sequelae, are considerable. To date, multiplestudies have evaluated the efficacy of several beha-vioral interventions in alleviating a range of cancer-related   sequelae   (e.g.,  fatigue,   mood,  cognition,physical  function)  including  exercise  and  diet  pro-grams,  and  cognitive  behavioral  therapies  [1517].While most of these interventions have been foundto improve certain aspects of quality of life or reduceparticular symptoms, few studies have examined theeffects   of   behavioral   interventions   on   cognitivefunction  in  cancer.  Behavioral  interventions  thathave been associated with improved cognitive func-tion  [17],  however,  may  not  address  a  patient’spsycho-spiritual needs which, in addition  to cogni-tive  function,  are  important  to  quality  of  life  formany  patients  [18].  Furthermore,  the  long-termeffectiveness  and  utilization  of  interventions  thatrequire guidance or administration by a professional(e.g., clinical psychologist) may be limited relative toan intervention that an individual can practice on hisor her own at any time.As  a result,  interest  in mind-body programs andtheir holistic approach to treatment continues to gainmomentum as these techniques address the complexinteraction  among  mental,  physical,  and  spiritualoutcomes [19], and can be practiced both individu-ally and  in groups. Thus  far, mind-body  programshave  been  primarily  advocated  as  interventions  torelieve  stress,  improve  mood,  reduce  fatigue  andimprove sleep quality in cancer populations [2022].However,  studies   have   reported   that   meditationpractice has significantly improved objective cogni-tive   function   in   both   non-clinical   [2325]   andclinical  populations  including  children  and  adultswith   ADHD   [2628].   Furthermore,   preliminaryevidence suggests that meditation may have neuro-protective effects against normal aging and a geneticpredisposition to develop dementia [2931].In this review, we propose that meditation may beparticularly beneficial for patients with cancer-relatedcognitive impairment as it is generally non-selectiveand  could  alleviate  a  wide  range  of  cancer-relatedsequelae,  such  as  psychological  adjustment,  whichcould   address  impaired   subjective  and   objectivecognitive  function.  Objective  cognitive  function  isdefined here as the mental processes that are assessedindependently from the patient’s self-reported mentalfunction  by  standardized  neuropsychological  mea-sures. Subjective cognitive function is defined as thepatient’s perceived, self reported view of his or hermental function. Several studies have failed to find asignificant association between objective and subjec-tive  cognitive  function  [3235].  Furthermore,  sub-jective, but not objective, cognitive dysfunction hasbeen frequently associated with psychological adjust-ment  [3436],  and  some  evidence  suggests  thatperceived cognitive difficulties occur more frequentlythan  cognitive  function  assessed  through  objectivemeasures [37]. Given that the majority of studies onthis topic examined objective cognitive function, inthis review, cancer-related cognitive impairment willpertain  to  objective  cognitive  dysfunction  unlessotherwise specified.Cognitive impairment and cancerThe   following   sections   will   primarily   focus   onwomen  treated  for  breast  cancer  as  cancer-relatedcognitive  impairment  has  been  the  most  widelystudied   in   that   population.   However,   cognitivedysfunction   has   been   reported   in   other   cancerpopulations  who  often  undergo  multimodal  treat-ment  and  experience  physical  and  psychologicalsymptoms similar to breast cancer patients.Chemotherapy-related cognitive impairmentChemotherapy-related   cognitive   impairment   hasbeen  the  most  widely  reported  source  of  cognitivedeficits  in  cancer  patients,  particularly  in  breastcancer. However, initial evidence suggests that che-motherapy-related  cognitive  impairment  has  beenobserved in patients with other types of cancer (e.g.,lymphoma)  [4].  The  deficits  are  often  subtle,  andalthough  assessments  have  varied  across  studies,memory, attention/concentration, executive function,processing  speed,  and  visual-spatial  skills  are  oftenreported to be impaired [34,35,3841]. While someinsight into the risk factors, symptoms, and neurolo-gical  mechanisms  associated  with  chemotherapy-related cognitive impairment has been identified, theetiology is not well understood. Some chemotherapyagents may have neurotoxic characteristics including(e.g.,    5-fluorouracil    (5-FU))    (for    review,    see[1,42,43]).   The   hypothesized   neurotoxic   effectshave included damage to the cerebral parenchyma,inflammatory  immune  response,  cerebral  vascular
obstruction, and disruption in normal neural func-tion, which have been attributed to abnormalities incortical density and metabolism [2,43]. Several retro-spective studies have found that cognitive impairmentcan occur in women while undergoing chemotherapyand persist for years after completing treatment [4].Some  women  have  an  increased  risk  of  developingtreatment-related  cognitive  impairment  relative  toothers and the risk of impairment appears to be dosedependent.  That  is,  higher  doses  of  chemotherapyhave been associated with greater incidence of cogni-tive impairment [44].Findings  from  neurophysiological  studies  havefound  a  reduced  P300  amplitude  [45],  an  event-related  potential  (ERP)  index  of  attention,  andabnormal  alpha  wave  activity,  indicating  a  higherlikelihood  of  neuropathology  in  women  who  hadundergone  high  dose  rather  than  low  dose  che-motherapy. Some neuroimaging studies have foundabnormalities in white and gray matter and corticalfunction  in  breast  cancer  patients  who  had  under-gone  chemotherapy. Gray and white matter  reduc-tions  in  breast  cancer  survivors  (BCS)  have  beenreported  one  year  post  chemotherapy  relative  to  agroup of BCS who had never received chemotherapy[46]. Silverman et al. [47,48] have found metabolicabnormalities  in  the  prefrontal  cortex  associatedwith  chemotherapy  and  tamoxifen  treatment.  Asmost studies reporting chemotherapy-related deficitshave been retrospective, they have not accounted forpossible deficits occurring prior to chemotherapy inBCS [49]. Hermelink et al. [50] and Wefel et al. [49]found  that  a  large  proportion  of  patients  testedwithin  each  study  displayed  cognitive  impairmentprior  to  starting  chemotherapy. It should be notedthat patients assessed by Hermelink et al. [50] weretested  prior  to  preoperative  chemotherapy,  initiallyruling  out  surgery  as  a  possible  factor  involved  inpre-chemotherapy  cognitive  impairment.  However,Wefel  et  al.  [51]  reported  a  non-significant  trendsuggesting that patients who underwent lumpectomyor  mastectomy,  or  were  postmenopausal,  prior  tochemotherapy,  had  a  greater  risk  of  cognitive  im-pairment.  Several  factors  have  been  attributed  topre-chemotherapy  cognitive  impairment  includingstress resulting from a cancer diagnosis [50], indivi-dual differences in pre-cancer cognitive reserve, andparaneoplastic syndromes [51].Cognitive function and hormonesRecent findings suggest that a decrease in circulatingestrogen may play a role in cancer-related cognitivedeficits, as reduced estrogen and progesterone levelshave been linked to attention, learning, and memoryimpairment [1]. BCS who received hormone therapy,but  had  never  undergone  chemotherapy,  showedimpaired cognitive function relative to healthy con-trols [52]. Other studies have reported that BCS whohad   received  both   chemotherapy   and   tamoxifendisplayed  a  greater  degree  of  cognitive dysfunction[33]  and  reduced  metabolism  in  the  basal  ganglia[48] relative to control groups. Additional evidencesupporting  an  association  between  estrogen  andcognitive function in cancer was reported by Castel-lon et al. [53] who found that women who receivedradiotherapy  (but  no  chemotherapy  or  hormonetherapy)  performed  at  a  similar  or  higher  level  offunction on several cognitive tasks relative to healthycontrols  matched  on  age,  education,  and  IQ.  Theauthors suggested that good cognitive performance inthe  BCS  was  associated  with  high  premorbid  en-dogenous estrogen levels.It should be noted that men who undergo andro-gen ablation treatment may be at risk for experien-cing cognitive decline. Similar to women treated forestrogen sensitive tumors, men who undergo andro-gen  deprivation  therapy  for  testosterone  sensitivecancer (e.g., prostate cancer) may experience cogni-tive impairment [54], given the positive associationfound  between  testosterone  and  cognitive  function[55].  However,  additional  research  in  this  area  isneeded  in  order  to  further  elucidate  the  effects  ofhormone deprivation therapy and cognitive functionin men with cancer.Proinflammatory cytokines, fatigue, and cognitiveimpairmentBower, Ganz, and colleagues have reported clinicallevels of fatigue in BCS up to 10 years following adiagnosis; furthermore, fatigue was associated withgreater levels of depression, reports of attention andmemory related  difficulties, and increased  levels ofproinflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-1b, sTNF-RII)[56].  Patients  with  other   types  of  cancer  oftenexperience   changes   in   immune   function,   whichhave been associated with psychological and physicalside  effects,  including  cognitive  dysfunction.  Forinstance,  increased  cytokine  levels  in  patients  withAcute  Myelogenous  Leukemia  or  MyelodysplasticSyndrome  have  been  associated  with  cognitive  im-pairment [57].Proinflammatory  cytokines  can  be  secreted  inresponse  to  psychological  and  physical  (e.g.,  animmune  response  to  a  tumor  or  chemotherapy)stressors,  and  have  been  linked  with  declines  inmemory  and  planning  abilities  [58].  The  relation-ship among cellular immunity, fatigue and cognitivedysfunction  is  complex,  as  cancer-related  cognitiveimpairment    may    result    from    proinflammatorycytokines   directly   interfering   with   normal   brain
function,  from  a  lack  of  motivation  or  self-efficacydue to persistent fatigue, or a combination of bothfactors  [43,59].  Although  cognitive  deficits  havebeen  observed  independent  of  mood  disturbance[49], distress and fatigue have been associated withcognitive  dysfunction  in  some  cancer  patients  andmay  exacerbate  perceived  and  actual  cognitive  de-cline during and following treatment.Pharmacotherapy for cancer-related cognitiveimpairmentAs  cancer-related  cognitive  dysfunction  continuesto  receive  recognition,  pharmacotherapy  has  beenindicated   based   on   the   use   of   pharmacologictreatment in other diseases or disorders with similarsymptoms   or   etiologies   [60].   Erythropoiten   hasbeen  indicated  to  improve  cognitive  impairmentby  increasing  metabolic  activity;  although,  the  useof   erythropoiten   in   non-anemic   patients   is   notrecommended  [60].  Antidepressants  may  be  indi-cated   for   patients   who   are   experiencing   mooddisturbances and report subjective cognitive impair-ment. However, such treatment would be limited topatients   who   meet   clinical   criteria   for   a   mooddisorder.  Methylphenidate  (Ritalin)  has  been  indi-cated   as   treatment   for   both   impaired   cognitivefunction  and  fatigue  [61].  Some  side  effects,  how-ever,   are   also   associated   with   methylphenidateincluding  hypertension,  angina,  glaucoma,  and  insome  cases,  addiction  [60,62].  Furthermore,  tworecent studies have failed to find improved cognitivefunction  and  fatigue  in  double-blind  placebo  con-trolled   trials   testing   methylphenidate   in   cancerpatients [63,64].Modafinil (Provigil) has been indicated recently toalleviate  fatigue  and  cognitive  impairment  and  hasbeen found to be effective with minimal side effects[65]. Kohli and colleagues found enhanced perfor-mance in memory and attention in women who hadpreviously undergone chemotherapy for breast can-cer. Initial  findings also  suggest that modafinil  canalleviate   fatigue   [66,67].   While   initial   evidencesuggests a link between improved cognitive functionand pharmacotherapy [8,61], it should be noted thatpharmacotherapy alone cannot alleviate other symp-toms  (e.g.,  distress,  sleep  disturbances)  and  lacksbenefits  often  derived  from  behavioral-based  inter-ventions  such as self-efficacy, control, and physicalactivity.  Moreover,  behavioral-based  interventionsmay  provide  lifelong  coping  tools  to  help  decreasedistress,  improve  quality  of  life,  impart  a  sense  ofempowerment,  and  promote  long-term  cost  effec-tiveness [13,68].SummaryCancer-related  cognitive  deficits  can  occur  in  theform of objective or subjective impairment. Findingsfrom   several   studies   suggest   that   objective   andsubjective cognitive function are not associated, andthat subjective, but not objective cognitive function isoften associated with mood. Cancer-related objectivecognitive  impairment  (in  the  absence  of  a  primarybrain tumor or metastases) is typically subtle, affect-ing  higher  order  cognitive  function  (e.g.,  workingmemory, executive function) and the correspondingcortical and subcortical regions thought to subservethese processes. While most research in this area hasbeen  conducted  with  BCS  who  have  undergonechemotherapy,  recent  studies  have  examined  otherpopulations, particularly patients who receive similartreatment regimens (e.g., hormone deprivation ther-apy). Within the literature, chemotherapy is consis-tently  cited  as  a  factor  involved  in  cancer-relatedcognitive  impairment.  The  underlying  mechanismsof  chemotherapy-related  cognitive  impairment  arestill debated within the literature and are beyond thescope  of  this  paper  (see  [2]  for  a  recent  review).However, the evidence suggests that chemotherapy-related cognitive deficits can occur independently ofmood  disturbance.  Several  studies  have  found  apositive association between hormone function andcognitive   function   in   men   and   women,   furthersuggesting  that  hormone  deprivation  therapy  mayplay a role in cancer-related cognitive impairment. Apro-inflammatory  immune  response  is  also  likely  acontributing factor. In summary, several factors cancontribute  to  cancer-related  cognitive  impairment,potentially aggravating other symptoms and decreas-ing quality of life. Given the diffuse nature of cancer-related  cognitive  impairment,  we  propose  that  aneffective intervention will take all of these factors intoaccount.MeditationThe combination of various adverse effects associatedwith cancer therapy can create difficulty in returningto previous roles and activities during and followingtreatment and decrease quality of life. A mind-bodypractice  such  as  meditation,  offers  a  potentiallyeffective intervention, alone or in combination withother therapy to alleviate both objective and subjec-tive cognitive dysfunction in addition to other treat-ment-related   side   effects.   Meditation   has   beendescribed  as  ‘‘a wakeful  hypometabolic  physiologicstate’’ in which the practitioner is extremely relaxed,yet  alert  and  focused  [69].  Although  meditationmethods  can vary,  many  types  of  meditation  sharecommon features including the focused, controlled
regulation of breathing and control over thoughts andfeelings  that  come  to  mind.  Given  the  continuousattention-based processes involved in initiating andmaintaining a meditative state, meditation has beenproposed   to   be   an   attentional   training   exercise[70,71].With regard to alleviating cancer-related cognitivedeficits, we advocate practices that require initial andsustained  mental  effort  on  the  part  of  the  practi-tioner, as opposed to practices that are designed tomerely  clear  or  empty  the  mind.  Such  effortfulpractices   would   include   focused   meditation,   inwhich the practitioner focuses on a single object orthought,  and  mindfulness  or  insight  meditation,which trains the practitioner to attend to the wholeof their experience without the sense of subject andobject. Based on formulations put forward by Lutzand colleagues [72], focused meditation requires theability to initiate and focus attention on an intendedobject  over  a  prolonged  period,  inhibit  potentialdistractions, and subsequently reengage the focusedmeditative state. Mindfulness or insight meditationpractices   are   different   in   that   they   require   theconstant monitoring of the practitioner’s experienceas a whole, but like focused meditation, requires theability to disengage from a distracting entity (e.g., athought,   sound,   etc.)   (see   Table   I).   Based   onfindings  that  will  be  discussed  in  subsequent  sec-tions, several studies suggest that meditation engagesand  modulates  neural  circuits  that  subserve  thehigher   order   cognitive   processes   that   are   oftenimpaired in cancer-related cognitive deficits. Impor-tantly, although the previously discussed meditationpractices require considerable mental effort from thepractitioner, they simultaneously promote relaxationand a sense of well-being as the practitioner becomesmore  familiar  with  the  techniques.  The  followingsub-sections   specifically   focus   on   the   effects   ofmeditation  on  cognitive  function,  given  the  mainobjective of this review. Other benefits of meditationpractice in cancer populations are briefly discussedin subsequent sections, but for more, comprehensivereviews of meditation in cancer see [2022].
regulation of breathing and control over thoughts andfeelings  that  come  to  mind.  Given  the  continuousattention-based processes involved in initiating andmaintaining a meditative state, meditation has beenproposed   to   be   an   attentional   training   exercise[70,71].With regard to alleviating cancer-related cognitivedeficits, we advocate practices that require initial andsustained  mental  effort  on  the  part  of  the  practi-tioner, as opposed to practices that are designed tomerely  clear  or  empty  the  mind.  Such  effortfulpractices   would   include   focused   meditation,   inwhich the practitioner focuses on a single object orthought,  and  mindfulness  or  insight  meditation,which trains the practitioner to attend to the wholeof their experience without the sense of subject andobject. Based on formulations put forward by Lutzand colleagues [72], focused meditation requires theability to initiate and focus attention on an intendedobject  over  a  prolonged  period,  inhibit  potentialdistractions, and subsequently reengage the focusedmeditative state. Mindfulness or insight meditationpractices   are   different   in   that   they   require   theconstant monitoring of the practitioner’s experienceas a whole, but like focused meditation, requires theability to disengage from a distracting entity (e.g., athought,   sound,   etc.)   (see   Table   I).   Based   onfindings  that  will  be  discussed  in  subsequent  sec-tions, several studies suggest that meditation engagesand  modulates  neural  circuits  that  subserve  thehigher   order   cognitive   processes   that   are   oftenimpaired in cancer-related cognitive deficits. Impor-tantly, although the previously discussed meditationpractices require considerable mental effort from thepractitioner, they simultaneously promote relaxationand a sense of well-being as the practitioner becomesmore  familiar  with  the  techniques.  The  followingsub-sections   specifically   focus   on   the   effects   ofmeditation  on  cognitive  function,  given  the  mainobjective of this review. Other benefits of meditationpractice in cancer populations are briefly discussedin subsequent sections, but for more, comprehensivereviews of meditation in cancer see [2022].
regions. However, an inverted u-shaped function wasfound  when  comparing  all  three  groups  as  expertmeditators obtained significantly less activation thanintermediate meditators in the attention-related re-gions of interest. The authors proposed that medita-tion  engages  attentional  neural  systems,  but  at  ahighly advanced level, mental control and the abilityto maintain a meditative state becomes less effortfulas indicated by lower levels of activation in the expertgroup.Meditation and subjective cognitive functionAs discussed previously, several studies have failed tofind an association between subjective and objectivecognitive  impairment;  rather,  subjective  cognitiveimpairment  may  occur  more  often  and  has  beenassociated with  mood  disturbance. Specific aspectsand   mediating   factors   (e.g.,   sleep   disturbances,hormone levels) involved in the association betweenmood  and  perceived  cognitive  function  have  notbeen  reported  in  detail.  However,  several  studiesevaluating  the  effects  of  a  meditation  based  inter-vention  have  reported  improvements  in  aspects  ofmood and stress [79,80], which may play a mediat-ing  role  in  improved  subjective  cognitive  function.Future  studies  exploring  the  association  betweenpsychological  adjustment  and  perceived  cognitivefunction  would  be  helpful  in  tailoring  meditationprograms  to address  both characterizations of  cog-nitive impairment.Meditation, illness, and cancerIn  addition  to  improved  cognitive  function,  otherpositive outcomes have included reductions in anxi-ety  and  pain,  and  improvement  in  psychologicalwell-being and quality of life [81,82]. The findingssuggest that meditation may be a particularly effec-tive intervention for  the psychological and physicalsequelae  associated  with  a  cancer  diagnosis  andtreatment,  especially  since  the  number  of  cancerpatients who seek complementary therapies in addi-tion  to  standard  care  continue  to  increase.  Earlierstudies have investigated the efficacy of meditation,particularly  MBSR,  for  patients  with  cancer.  In  amixed  cancer   population,   MBSR   was   found   toreduce  levels  of  depression  and  stress  relative  to  acontrol group [82]. Carlson et al. [80] examined thebenefits of MBSR in an outpatient oncology popula-tion and found the program was effective in decreas-ing    mood    disturbance    and    stress    symptoms.Importantly,  the  effect  was  maintained  up  to  oneyear later [80].While several studies have investigated the effectsof meditation practice on sleep disturbances, distress,immune function, cortisol levels, and fatigue duringcancer  treatment and survival, no randomized trialhas examined the effects of meditation on cognitivefunction, as assessed by standardized neuropsycho-logical tests, in cancer patients. Although it has notbeen used as an intervention for cognitive dysfunc-tion in cancer patients, meditation has been reportedas an effective cognitive-based intervention in chil-dren and adults with ADHD and individuals poten-tially at risk for developing dementia [26,27,30].The proposed effects of meditation oncancer-related cognitive impairment andother side effectsAs   discussed   previously,   cancer-related   cognitiveimpairment   often   includes   deficits   in   attention,memory,   and   executive   function.   Based   on   thebehavioral and neurophysiological findings, we pro-pose  that  meditation  may  act  as  a  mental  trainingactivity that could improve cognitive function withinthese domains. We further propose that since med-itation   practice   provides   training   in   objectivelyacknowledging   and   releasing   other   thoughts   orfeelings  that  come  to  mind,  cancer  patients  mayhave decreased intrusive thoughts and be better ableto  cope  with  negative  thoughts,  feelings,  or  emo-tions, which may improve perceived cognitive func-tion.  In  correspondence  to  the  neural  correlates  ofmeditation  that  have  been  associated  with  reducedlevels  of  anxiety  and  reactivity  to  acute  pain  andimproved  immune  response,  Davidson  and  others[83]  have  suggested  that  meditation  helps  to  resetthe frontal systems that regulate emotional responsesand  sense  of  self.  As  immune-based  inflammatoryprocesses  may  also  influence  cognition  and  treat-ment-related symptoms, a meditation-based practicecould  be  beneficial  as  it  has  been  associated  withregulation and positive changes in immune function[77,80,84].  In  addition,  meditation  programs  havebeen associated with stress reduction and improvedsleep  quality,  which  may  help  to  regulate  stress-induced cortisol levels [79,80,84], and play a med-iating  role  in  improving  subjective  cognitive  func-tion.  Based  on  these  findings,  we  hypothesize  thatmeditation practice would be an effective interven-tion  to  help  alleviate  self-reported  and  objectivecognitive  decline  that  can  result  from  cancer  andits  treatment,  as  well  as  other  common  sequelaeincluding  disturbances  in  affect  and  sleep,  fatigue,nausea, pain and declines in quality of life. It shouldbe  noted  that  some  of  the  previous  meditationfindings  should  be  interpreted  with  caution  giventhat  these  studies  often  lacked  strict  methodology,making  it  difficult  to  interpret  and  generalize  theresults  [85].  Future  studies  using  a  more  rigorous
design,  such  as  a  randomized  controlled  trial,  arenecessary to strengthen the credibility of the findingsand  interpretations  attributed  to  meditation,  parti-cularly in cancer populations.As  many  forms  of  meditation  do  not  requirephysical  activity,  thus  posing  little  danger  to  thepatient, meditation  practice may be  feasible  at  anytreatment stage. There are various forms of medita-tion  and  patients  should  be  exposed  to  differentpractices  until  they  find  one  that  suits  them.  Themode  of  administration  of  a  meditation  program(e.g., in class) and other feasibility issues should betaken into account when considering the populationand  stage  of  treatment  for  whom  the  program  isdesigned. Patients undergoing active treatment typi-cally have limited time and inconsistent schedules inorder  to accommodate work and other responsibil-ities, which could affect their ability to participate instructured  intervention  classes.  Perhaps  a  programwith  few  in-class  sessions,  with  the  majority  oftraining online or through another medium such asan  auditory  CD,  may  increase  feasibility  in  thisgroup.  In  contrast,  patients  outside  of  treatmentmay have more flexibility in their schedules, whichcould  increase  the  feasibility of  regular  class  atten-dance.As  objective  and  subjective  cognitive  functioncontinues to gain recognition as a critical aspect ofquality of life in cancer patients and survivors, it isimportant to develop effective interventions as wellas examine the mechanisms underlying their efficacy.Emerging research suggests that meditation practiceis associated with a considerable number of benefitsand has helped to elucidate the complex relationshipbetween  mental  and  physical  health.  Given  thatmeditation  practice  has  been  associated  with  im-proved cognitive function in non-cancer populationsand  has  been  shown  to  alleviate  several  cancer-related sequelae, further examination of the associa-tion   between   meditation   practice   and   cognitivefunction  is  warranted  in  both  cancer  patients  andsurvivors.
AcknowledgementsThis work was partially supported by the NationalCancer  Institute  Grant  R01CA105023  awarded  toLorenzo Cohen.
References[1]  Wefel  JS,  Kayl  AE,  Meyers  CA.  Neuropsychological  dys-function  associated  with  cancer  and  cancer  therapies:  Aconceptual review of an emerging target. Br J Cancer 2004;/90:/16916.[2]  Ahles TA, Saykin AJ. Candidate mechanisms for chemother-apy-induced  cognitive  changes.  Nat  Rev  Cancer  2007;/7:/192201.[3]  Bower  JE.  Behavioral  symptoms  in  patients  with  breastcancer and survivors. J Clin Oncol 2008;/26:/76877.[4]  Tannock IF, Ahles TA, Ganz PA, Van Dam FS. Cognitiveimpairment  associated  with  chemotherapy  for  cancer:  Re-port of a workshop. J Clin Oncol 2004;/22:/22339.[5]  Vardy J, Tannock I. Cognitive function after chemotherapyin adults with solid tumours. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2007;/63:/183202.[6]  NCI. President’s Cancer Panel Meeting. Cancer care issuesin the United States quality of care, quality of life, January 1,1997 to December 31, 1998: National Cancer Institute.[7]  NCCS. Palliative care and symptom management. CognitiveIssues  [cited;  Available  from:  http://www.canceradvocacy.org/resources/essential/effects/cognitive_test.aspx (accessedFebruary 2007)[8]  Kohli  S,  Fisher  SG,  Tra  Y,  Wesnes  K,  Morrow  GR.  Thecognitive  effects  of  modafinil in  breast  cancer  survivors:  Arandomized clinical trial. ASCO Annual Meeting; 2007.[9]  Nelson CJ, Nandy N, Roth AJ. Chemotherapy and cognitivedeficits: Mechanisms, findings, and potential interventions.Palliat Support Care 2007;/5:/27380.[10]  O’Shaughnessy JA, Vukelja SJ, Holmes FA, Savin M, JonesM, Royall D, et al. Feasibility of quantifying the effects ofepoetin  alfa  therapy  on  cognitive  function  in  women  withbreast  cancer  undergoing  adjuvant  or  neoadjuvant  che-motherapy. Clin Breast Cancer 2005;/5:/43946.[11]  Rozans M, Dreisbach A, Lertora JJ, Kahn MJ. Palliative usesof methylphenidate in patients with cancer: A review. J ClinOncol 2002;/20:/3359.[12]  Gordon L, Graves N, Hawkes A, Eakin E. A review of thecost-effectiveness  of  face-to-face  behavioural  interventionsfor smoking, physical activity, diet and alcohol. Chronic Illn2007;/3:/10129.[13]  Stant AD, Ten Vergert EM, den Boer PC, Wiersma D. Cost-effectiveness  of  cognitive  self-therapy  in  patients  with  de-pression and anxiety disorders. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2008;/117:/5766.[14]  Bandura  A.  Health  promotion  by  social  cognitive  means.Health Educ Behav 2004;/31:/14364.[15]  Basen-Engquist  K,  Taylor  CL,  Rosenblum  C,  Smith  MA,Shinn EH, Greisinger A, et al. Randomized pilot test of alifestyle   physical   activity   intervention   for   breast   cancersurvivors. Patient Educ Couns 2006;/64:/22534.[16]  Demark-Wahnefried  W, Clipp EC, Lipkus IM, Lobach D,Snyder DC, Sloane R, et al. Main outcomes of the FRESHSTART  trial:  A  sequentially  tailored,  diet  and  exercisemailed print intervention among breast and prostate cancersurvivors. J Clin Oncol 2007;/25:/270918.[17]  Ferguson   RJ,   Ahles   TA,   Saykin   AJ,   McDonald   BC,Furstenberg   CT,   Cole   BF,   et   al.   Cognitive-behavioralmanagement   of   chemotherapy-related   cognitive   change.Psychooncology 2007;/16:/7727.[18]  Brady MJ, Peterman AH, Fitchett G, Mo M, Cella D. A casefor  including  spirituality  in  quality  of  life  measurement  inoncology. Psychooncology 1999;/8:/41728.[19]  Carmody J, Reed G, Kristeller J, Merriam P. Mindfulness,spirituality, and health-related symptoms. J Psychosom Res2008;/64:/393403.[20]  Mackenzie  MJ,  Carlson  LE,  Speca  M.  Mindfulness-BasedStress  Reduction  (MBSR)  in  oncology:  Rationale  and  re-view. Evidence-Based Integrat Med 2005;/2:/13945.[21]  Matchim Y, Armer JM. Measuring the psychological impactof  mindfulness  meditation  on  health  among  patients  with24K. A. Biegler et al.
cancer:  A  literature  review.  Oncol  Nurs  Forum  2007;/34:/105966.[22]  Winbush  NY,   Gross   CR,  Kreitzer   MJ.   The  effects   ofmindfulness-based stress reduction on sleep disturbance: Asystematic review. Explore (NY) 2007;/3:/58591.[23]  Brefczynski-Lewis  J,  Lutz  A,  Schaefer  H,  Levinson  D,Davidson  R.  Neural  correlates  of  attentional  expertise  inlong-term meditation practioners. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA2007;/104:/114838.[24]  Jha   A,   Krompinger   J,   Baime   M.   Mindfulness   trainingmodifies subsystems of attention. Cogn Affect Behav Neu-rosci 2007;/7:/10919.[25]  Slagter H, Lutz A, Greischar LL, Francis A, Nieuwenhuis S,Davis J, et al. Mental training affects distribution of limitedbrain resources. Public Libr Sci Biol 2007;/5:/122835.[26]  Harrison L, Manocha R, Rubia K. Sahaja Yoga meditationas a family treatment programme for children with attentiondeficit-hyperactivity disorder. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry2004;/9:/47997.[27]  Stevenson   CS,   Whitmont   S,   Bornholt   L,   Livesey   D,Stevenson RJ. A cognitive remediation programme for adultswith Attention Deficit Hyperactivity  Disorder. Aust  N  Z JPsychiatry 2002;/36:/6106.[28]  Zylowska L, Ackerman DL, Yang MH, Futrell JL, HortonNI, Hale S, et al. Mindfulness meditation training in adultsand  adolescents  with  ADHD:  A  feasibility  study.  J  AttenDisord 2007.[29]  Doraiswamy  PM,  Xiong  GL.  Does  meditation  enhancecognition and brain longevity? Ann N Y Acad Sci 2007.[30]  Khalsa  D,  Newberg  A.  Stress,  meditation,  SPECT  scans,and dementia prevention. Alzheimer Demen 2007;/3:/S126.[31]  Pagnoni G, Cekic M. Age effects on gray matter volume andattentional performance in Zen meditation. Neurobiol Aging2007;/28:/16237.[32]  Ahles  TA,  Saykin  AJ,  Furstenberg  CT,  Cole  B,  Mott  LA,Skalla K, et al. Neuropsychologic impact of standard-dosesystemic  chemotherapy  in  long-term  survivors  of  breastcancer and lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2002;/20:/48593.[33]  Castellon SA, Ganz PA, Bower JE, Petersen L, Abraham L,Greendale GA. Neurocognitive performance in breast cancersurvivors exposed to adjuvant chemotherapy and tamoxifen.J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 2004;/26:/95569.[34]  Schagen   SB,   van   Dam   FS,   Muller   MJ,   Boogerd   W,Lindeboom  J,  Bruning  PF.  Cognitive  deficits  after  post-operative   adjuvant   chemotherapy   for   breast   carcinoma.Cancer 1999;/85:/64050.[35]  van Dam FS, Schagen SB, Muller MJ, Boogerd W, Wall E,Droogleever  Fortuyn  ME,  et  al.  Impairment  of  cognitivefunction in women receiving adjuvant treatment for high-riskbreast  cancer:  High-dose  versus  standard-dose  chemother-apy. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;/90:/2108.[36]  Cull A, Hay C, Love SB, Mackie M, Smets E, Stewart M.What  do  cancer  patients  mean  when  they  complain  ofconcentration  and  memory  problems?  Br  J  Cancer  1996;/74:/16749.[37]  Downie FP, Mar Fan HG, Houede-Tchen N, Yi Q, TannockIF. Cognitive function, fatigue, and menopausal symptomsin breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant chemotherapy:Evaluation  with  patient  interview  after  formal  assessment.Psychooncology 2006;/15:/92130.[38]  Ahles  TA,  Saykin  AJ.  Breast  cancer  chemotherapy-relatedcognitive dysfunction. Clin Breast Cancer 2002;/3(Suppl 3):/S8490.[39]  Brezden CB, Phillips KA, Abdolell M, Bunston T, TannockIF.  Cognitive  function  in  breast  cancer  patients  receivingadjuvant chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 2000;/18:/2695701.[40]  Vardy J, Wefel JS, Ahles T, Tannock IF, Schagen SB. Cancerand cancer-therapy related cognitive dysfunction: An inter-national  perspective  from  the  Venice  cognitive  workshop.Ann Oncol 2008;/19:/6239.[41]  Wieneke MH, Dienst ER. Neuropsychological assessment ofcognitive  functioning  following  chemotherapy  for  breastcancer. Psychooncology 1995;/4:/616.[42]  Ferguson RJ, Ahles TA. Low neuropsychologic performanceamong  adult  cancer  survivors  treated  with  chemotherapy.Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 2003;/3:/21522.[43]  Saykin   AJ,   Ahles   TA,   McDonald   BC.   Mechanisms   ofchemotherapy-induced cognitive disorders: Neuropsycholo-gical,  pathophysiological,  and  neuroimaging  perspectives.Semin Clin Neuropsychiatry 2003;/8:/20116.[44]  Schagen SB, Hamburger HL, Muller MJ, Boogerd W, vanDam  FS.  Neurophysiological  evaluation  of  late  effects  ofadjuvant  high-dose  chemotherapy  on  cognitive  function.J Neurooncol 2001;/51:/15965.[45]  Kreukels  BP,  Schagen  SB,  Ridderinkhof  KR,  Boogerd  W,Hamburger  HL,  van  Dam  FS.  Electrophysiological  corre-lates  of  information  processing  in  breast-cancer  patientstreated  with  adjuvant  chemotherapy.  Breast  Cancer  ResTreat 2005;/94:/5361.[46]  Inagaki M, Yoshikawa E, Matsuoka Y, Sugawara Y, NakanoT, Akechi T, et al. Smaller regional volumes of brain grayand  white  matter  demonstrated  in  breast  cancer  survivorsexposed   to   adjuvant   chemotherapy.   Cancer   2007;/109:/14656.[47]  Silverman DH, Castellon SA, Abraham L, Dy CJ, Pio BS,Ganz PA, et al. Abnormal brain metabolism in breast cancersurvivors  after  adjuvant  chemotherapy  is  associated  withcognitive changes. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2003.[48]  Silverman  DH,  Dy  CJ,  Castellon  SA,   Lai  J,   Pio  BS,Abraham  L,  et  al.  Altered  frontocortical,  cerebellar,  andbasal   ganglia   activity   in   adjuvant-treated   breast   cancersurvivors  510  years  after  chemotherapy.  Breast  CancerRes Treat 2006.[49]  Wefel  JS,  Lenzi  R,  Theriault  RL,  Davis  RN,  Meyers  CA.The   cognitive   sequelae   of   standard-dose   adjuvant   che-motherapy  in  women  with  breast  carcinoma:  Results  of  aprospective,  randomized,  longitudinal  trial.  Cancer  2004;/100:/22929.[50]  Hermelink K,  Untch  M, Lux  MP,  Kreienberg R,  Beck T,Bauerfeind I, et al. Cognitive function during neoadjuvantchemotherapy  for  breast  cancer:  results  of  a  prospective,multicenter, longitudinal study. Cancer. 2007 May 1;/109(9):/190513.[51]  Wefel JS, Lenzi R, Theriault R, Buzdar AU, Cruickshank S,Meyers CA. ‘Chemobrain’ in breast carcinoma?: A prologue.Cancer 2004;/101:/46675.[52]  Jenkins  V,  Shilling  V,  Fallowfield  L,  Howell  A,  Hutton  S.Does  hormone  therapy  for  the  treatment  of  breast  cancerhave a detrimental effect on memory and cognition? A pilotstudy. Psychooncology 2004;/13:/616.[53]  Castellon SA, Ganz PA, Abraham L, Bower JE, Pakilit A,Petersen  L,  et  al.  Neurocognitive  performance  in  breastcancer  following  exposure  to  adjuvant  systemic  therapy.National Academy of Neuropsychology 2001; San Francisco2001;/p. 85960.[54]  Alibhai SM, Gogov S, Allibhai Z. Long-term side effects ofandrogen  deprivation  therapy  in  men  with  non-metastaticprostate  cancer:  A  systematic  literature  review.  Crit  RevOncol Hematol 2006;/60:/20115.[55]  Beauchet  O.  Testosterone  and  cognitive  function:  Currentclinical evidence of  a relationship. Eur J Endocrinol 2006;/155:/77381.Cancer, cognitive impairment, and meditation25
[56]  Bower   JE,   Ganz   PA,   Aziz   N,   Fahey   JL.   Fatigue   andproinflammatory cytokine activity in breast cancer survivors.Psychosom Med 2002;/64:/60411.[57]  Meyers  CA,  Albitar  M,  Estey  E.  Cognitive  impairment,fatigue, and cytokine levels in patients with acute myelogen-ous  leukemia  or  myelodysplastic  syndrome.  Cancer  2005;/104:/78893.[58]  Capuron L, Ravaud A, Dantzer R. Timing and specificity ofthe  cognitive  changes  induced  by  interleukin-2  and  inter-feron-alpha treatments in cancer patients. Psychosom Med2001;/63:/37686.[59]  Ganz  PA,  Bower  JE.  Cancer  related  fatigue:  A  focus  onbreast cancer and Hodgkin’s disease survivors. Acta Oncol2007;/46:/4749.[60]  Staat K, Segatore M. The phenomenon of chemo brain. ClinJ Oncol Nurs 2005;/9:/71321.[61]  Meyers   CA,   Weitzner   MA,   Valentine   AD,   Levin   VA.Methylphenidate  therapy  improves  cognition,  mood,  andfunction  of  brain  tumor  patients.  J  Clin  Oncol  1998;/16:/25227.[62]  Challman TD, Lipsky JJ. Methylphenidate: Its pharmacol-ogy and uses. Mayo Clin Proc 2000;/75:/71121.[63]  Butler  JM,  Jr,  Case  LD,  Atkins  J,  Frizzell  B,  Sanders  G,Griffin P, et al. A phase III, double-blind, placebo-controlledprospective randomized clinical trial of d-threo-methylphe-nidate  HCl  in  brain  tumor  patients  receiving  radiationtherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2007;/69:/1496501.[64]  Mar Fan HG, Clemons M, Xu W, Chemerynsky I, BreunisH,  Braganza  S,  et  al.  A  randomised,  placebo-controlled,double-blind  trial  of  the  effects  of  d-methylphenidate  onfatigue  and  cognitive  dysfunction  in  women  undergoingadjuvant  chemotherapy  for  breast  cancer.  Support  CareCancer 2007.[65]  Pigeau  R,  Naitoh  P,  Buguet  A,  McCann  C,  Baranski  J,Taylor  M,  et  al.  Modafinil,  d-amphetamine  and  placeboduring  64  hours  of  sustained  mental  work.  I.  Effects  onmood, fatigue, cognitive performance and body temperature.J Sleep Res 1995;/4:/21228.[66]  Kaleita TA, Wellisch DK, Graham CA, Nghiemphu S, FordJM, Lai A, et al. Pilot study of modafinil for  treatment ofneurobehavioral  dysfunction  and  fatigue  in  adult  patientswith brain tumors. Am Soc Clin Oncol. J Clin Oncol 2006;/2006:/58\.[67]  Morrow GR, Shelke AR, Roscoe JA, Hickok JT, Mustian K.Management of cancer-related fatigue. Cancer Invest 2005;/23:/22939.[68]  Gordon J, Curtin S. Comprehensive cancer care: Integratingalternative,   complementary,   and   conventional   therapies.Cambridge, Massachusetts: Perseus Publishing; 2000.[69]  Wallace RK,  Benson H,  Wilson  AF.  A wakeful  hypometa-bolic physiologic state. Am J Physiol 1971;/221:/7959.[70]  Dietrich  A.  Functional  neuroanatomy  of  altered  states  ofconsciousness:   The   transient   hypofrontality   hypothesis.Conscious Cogn 2003;/12:/23156.[71]  Newberg  AB,  Iversen  J.  The  neural  basis  of  the  complexmental task of meditation: neurotransmitter and neurochem-ical considerations. Med Hypotheses 2003;/61:/28291.[72]  Lutz  A,  Slagter  HA,  Dunne  JD,  Davidson  RJ.  Attentionregulation and monitoring in meditation. Trends Cogn Sci2008;/12:/1639.[73]  So K, Orme-Johnson D. Three randomized experiments onthe  longitudinal  effects  of  the  transcendental  meditationtechnique on cognition. Intelligence 2001;/29:/41940.[74]  Valentine  ER,  Sweet  PLG.  Meditation  and  attention:  Acomparison of the effects of concentrative and mindfulnessmeditation  on  sustained  attention.  Ment  Health  Rel  Cult1999;/2:/5970.[75]  Lazar SW, Kerr CE, Wasserman RH, Gray JR, Greve DN,Treadway  MT,  et  al.  Meditation  experience  is  associatedwith  increased  cortical  thickness.  Neuroreport  2005;/16:/18937.[76]  van Veen V, Cohen JD, Botvinick MM, Stenger VA, CarterCS.  Anterior  cingulate  cortex,  conflict  monitoring,  andlevels of processing. Neuroimage 2001;/14:/13028.[77]  Davidson RJ, Kabat-Zinn J, Schumacher J, Rosenkranz M,Muller  D,  Santorelli  SF,  et  al.  Alterations  in  brain  andimmune  function   produced   by   mindfulness   meditation.Psychosom Med 2003;/65:/56470.[78]  Lutz A, Greischar LL, Rawlings NB, Ricard M, DavidsonRJ.    Long-term    meditators    self-induce    high-amplitudegamma synchrony during mental practice. Proc Natl AcadSci U S A 2004;/101:/1636973.[79]  Carlson  LE,  Garland  SN.  Impact  of  mindfulness-basedstress reduction (MBSR) on sleep, mood, stress and fatiguesymptoms in cancer outpatients. Int J Behav Med 2005;/12:/27885.[80]  Carlson LE, Speca M, Faris P, Patel KD. One year pre-postintervention follow-up of psychological, immune, endocrineand  blood  pressure  outcomes  of  mindfulness-based  stressreduction (MBSR) in breast and prostate cancer outpatients.Brain Behav Immun 2007;/21:/103849.[81]  Kabat-Zinn J. An outpatient program in behavioral medicinefor  chronic  pain  patients  based  on  the  practice  of  mind-fulness meditation: Theoretical considerations and prelimin-ary results. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 1982;/4:/3347.[82]  Speca M, Carlson LE, Goodey E, Angen M. A randomized,wait-list controlled clinical trial: The effect of a mindfulnessmeditation-based  stress  reduction  program  on  mood  andsymptoms of stress in cancer outpatients. Psychosom Med2000;/62:/61322.[83]  Davidson  RJ.  Affective  style,  psychopathology,  and  resili-ence: Brain mechanisms and plasticity. Am Psychol 2000;/55:/1196214.[84]  Carlson LE, Speca M, Patel KD, Goodey E. Mindfulness-based  stress  reduction  in  relation  to  quality of  life,  mood,symptoms of stress, and immune parameters in breast andprostate   cancer   outpatients.   Psychosom   Med   2003;/65:/57181.[85]  Ospina MB, Bond K, Karkhaneh M, Tjosvold L, Vanderm-eer B, Liang Y, et al. Meditation practices for health: State ofthe research. Evid Rep Technol Assess (Full Rep) 2007;/155:/1263.26K. A. Biegler et al.