Investigation of mindfulness meditation
practitioners with voxel-based morphometry
Britta K. Ho¨lzel,1 Ulrich Ott,1 Tim Gard,1 Hannes Hempel,1 Martin Weygandt,1 Katrin Morgen,1,2
and Dieter Vaitl1,3
1
Bender Institute of Neuroimaging, 2
Department of Neurology, Justus-Liebig-University, Giessen, and 3
Institute for Frontier Areas of
Psychology and Mental Health, Freiburg, Germany
Mindfulness meditators practice the non-judgmental observation of the ongoing stream of internal experiences as they arise.
Using voxel-based morphometry, this study investigated MRI brain images of 20 mindfulness (Vipassana) meditators (mean
practice 8.6 years; 2 h daily) and compared the regional gray matter concentration to that of non-meditators matched for sex,
age, education and handedness. Meditators were predicted to show greater gray matter concentration in regions that are
typically activated during meditation. Results confirmed greater gray matter concentration for meditators in the right anterior
insula, which is involved in interoceptive awareness. This group difference presumably reflects the training of bodily awareness
during mindfulness meditation. Furthermore, meditators had greater gray matter concentration in the left inferior temporal gyrus
and right hippocampus. Both regions have previously been found to be involved in meditation. The mean value of gray matter
concentration in the left inferior temporal gyrus was predictable by the amount of meditation training, corroborating the
assumption of a causal impact of meditation training on gray matter concentration in this region. Results suggest that meditation
practice is associated with structural differences in regions that are typically activated during meditation and in regions that are
relevant for the task of meditation.
Keywords: meditation; mindfulness; voxel-based morphometry; gray matter concentration
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, the clinical application of mindfulness and
its role in understanding human consciousness have come
into the focus of psychological research (Brown et al., 2007,
Psychological Inquiry). The practice of mindfulness requires
attentiveness to the internal experiences that arise at each
moment, adopting an attitude of non-judgmental acceptance
(Hart, 1987; Kabat-Zinn, 2003). The detached observation of
bodily sensations, emotions and thoughts is assumed to
interrupt automatic responding and to increase behavioral
flexibility (Bishop et al., 2004). Repeated training should
facilitate self-regulation of attention and improve emotion
regulation (Hart, 1987). In fact, empirical behavioral studies
support the idea that mindfulness training modifies
subsystems of attention (Jha et al., 2007), and enhances
well-being (Brown and Ryan, 2003). Clinical interventions
that incorporate mindfulness practices have proven effective
in the treatment of a broad spectrum of disorders (Baer,
2003; Grossman et al., 2004).
Recent studies showed that altered cognitive functions in
mindfulness meditators are associated with a difference in
the corresponding brain activations (Brefczynski-Lewis et al.,
2007; Ho¨lzel et al., 2007; Slagter et al., 2007). While several
studies have investigated the effects of meditation training
on brain function, little is known about the modification of
the brain structure that accompanies meditative practice.
In several domains, intensive training has been found to
increase gray matter in regions relevant for the respective
task, detectable in anatomical MRI scans. For instance,
brains of volunteers who have learned to juggle showed an
expansion in gray matter in the mid-temporal area and in
the left posterior intraparietal sulcus (Draganski et al., 2004).
Learning a second language increases the density of gray
matter in the left inferior parietal cortex (Mechelli et al.,
2004).
These recent studies challenged the traditionally held view
that learning changes only the way the brain functions, and
instead showed that structural changes at the macroscopic
level are possible. Presumably, the repeated activation of
certain regions leads to structural changes. A study by May
et al. (2007) shows that even repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation can cause cortical changes in gray matter within
5 days of intervention.
The only study published to date investigating the effects
of meditation training on brain structure (Lazar et al., 2005)
compared cortical thickness between mindfulness meditators
and non-meditators. Meditators had a significantly thicker
cortex in the right anterior insula, the left superior temporal
gyrus and the right middle and superior frontal sulci.
The right anterior insula is commonly activated during tasks
of interoceptive awareness and its local gray matter volume
correlates with interoceptive accuracy and visceral awareness
(Critchley et al., 2004). The observation of bodily sensations,
constantly performed during mindfulness meditation, might
thus be reflected in increased insular thickness in meditators.
According to Lazar et al. (2005), regular meditation is
thought to promote structural changes in a subset of cortical
regions in areas of interoceptive and somatosensory processing and attention regulation. The method of cortical
thickness analysis employed by Lazar et al. (2005) bears
the disadvantage that changes in subcortical structures
cannot be detected. The purpose of the present study was
to extend the findings of Lazar et al. (2005) by comparing
the regional gray matter concentration of mindfulness
meditators in the whole brain to that of people without
meditation experience. We used voxel-based morphometry
(VBM; Ashburner and Friston, 2000; Mechelli et al., 2005),
which permits an automated voxel-wise whole-brain statistical comparison of MRI scans. The VBM procedure involves
normalizing structural images to a standard template,
segmenting those into gray and white matter and smoothing
them (Ashburner and Friston, 2000).
We expected that meditators would show greater gray
matter concentration in regions that are activated during
meditation. Although only relatively few studies have
investigated the brain activation during meditation to date
(cf. Cahn and Polich, 2006; Lutz et al., 2007), some relevant
regions have been identified across different studies. Typical
patterns of activation during self-directed meditation
involve the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC; Newberg and Iversen, 2003;
Cahn and Polich, 2006). This activation is thought to
reflect the active regulation of attention. Further regions
found to be involved in meditation include the hippocampal/
parahippocampal formation (Lou et al., 1999; Lazar et al.,
2000; Ho¨lzel et al., 2007). The hippocampus is thought to be
important for meditation because of its involvement in
the modulation of cortical arousal and responsiveness
(Newberg and Iversen, 2003). Furthermore, activation
in the left inferior temporal gyrus and the left postcentral
gyrus was found during mindfulness exercises (Ho¨lzel et al.,
2007).
In addition to regions that are typically activated during
meditation, we tested the right anterior insula, an area
previously shown to differ between experienced meditators
and people without meditation experience (Lazar et al.,
2005). Group differences were tested in regions of interest
(ROI) analyses. We hypothesized that the DLPFC, ACC,
hippocampus, left inferior temporal gyrus, left postcentral
gyrus and right anterior insula would show greater gray
matter concentration in meditators than in controls.
Moreover, to test for changes in gray matter dependent
on the amount of meditation training, the accumulated
number of hours of meditation practice was used as a
predictor in a regression analysis.
METHODS
Study participants
Forty healthy, right-handed participants took part in the
study: 20 meditators (mean age: 34.1 years; s.d.: 4.7 years)
and 20 non-meditators (mean age: 34.0 years; s.d.: 5.1 years),
matched for sex, age, education and handedness. Each group
consisted of 16 male and four female participants.
Meditators were recruited from a Vipassana Center in
Germany, where meditation is taught in the tradition of
S.N. Goenka (Hart, 1987). Participants practiced meditation
2 h daily and their duration of meditation practice ranged
between 2.1 years and 16.2 years with a mean of 8.6 years
(s.d.: 5.0 years). On the basis of the daily practice and
the time spent in meditation retreats, the total amount of
hours of meditation training was estimated. Overall,
participants’ meditation training ranged between 1120 and
17 700 h with a mean of 6254 h (s.d.: 4529 h). Controls had
no experience with meditation. Written informed consent
was obtained from all participants.
Imaging data
High-resolution MRI data were acquired with a Siemens
Symphony 1.5 T scanner with standard head coil. Threedimensional data sets of the whole brain were collected using
a T1 weighted, magnetization prepared rapid acquisition
gradient echo (MP-RAGE) sequence, consisting of 160
sagittal partitions (slice thickness 1 mm, TI/TE/TR (inversion/echo/repetition time) 1100/4.18/1990 ms, flip angle 158,
matrix 256  256, field of view 250 mm).
Image analysis was performed using the voxel-based
morphometry toolbox by Gaser (2007) for SPM2 software
(Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London) in
MATLAB 6.5, release 13 (Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA,
USA). The toolbox by Gaser is an extension to the segmentation algorithm of SPM 2 and is based on the so-called
optimized VBM protocol first proposed by Good et al.
(2001; see also Mechelli et al., 2005).
All images were spatially normalized (12 parameter affine
registration followed by a non-linear registration) to the
same stereotaxic space using a customized template and
customized priors, which were created based on the 40
images of the whole sample. Images were then segmented
into gray matter, white matter and cerebrospinal fluid. For
our study, unmodulated images (Good et al., 2001) were
analyzed, as they do not take into account alterations in
volume due to normalization effects. Unmodulated images
contain the probability within each voxel for being gray
matter, i.e. the proportion of gray matter to other tissue
types within a region (Good et al., 2001). A 12 mm full width
at half maximum (FWHM) Isotropic Gaussian Kernel was
used to smooth images. The final probability maps were
tested voxel-wise using a two sample t-test for independent
samples in SPM2 to measure group differences in local gray
matter concentration. For definition of the ROIs,
the anatomical parcellation of the normalized brain
(single-subject high-resolution T1 volume of the Montreal
Neurological Institute) was used (Tzourio-Mazoyer et al.,
2002). Masks were created using MARINA software (Walter
et al., 2003). ROI analyses (family wise error corrected) were
calculated for the bilateral DLPFC, ACC, hippocampus, left
inferior temporal gyrus and left postcentral gyrus. In order
to obtain a mask for the right anterior insula, the standard
mask for the right insula was restricted to those voxels
anterior to MNI coordinate y ¼ 0.
For regions that yielded a group difference in local gray
matter concentration, we tested whether the amount of
meditation training could predict the gray matter value for
meditators. A positive correlation would corroborate the
causal role of meditation practice on the increase of gray
matter concentration. Within the identified regions, those
voxels were selected that showed t-values greater than
t ¼ 3.32 (corresponding to P ¼ 0.001, uncorrected for multiple comparisons) in the group comparison. Mean values of
gray matter probabilities in those areas for each of the
meditators were then used as the dependent variable and
the total number of hours of meditation practice served
as the predictor. Regression analyses were computed in
SPSS for Windows (Statistical Package for Social Sciences,
Release 12.0.2, 2004. Chicago: SPSS Inc.).
Finally, an exploratory whole-brain regression analysis in
SPM (threshold: P ¼ 0.001, uncorrected; cluster size > 20
voxels) was performed for the meditators, using the
accumulated hours of meditation practice to predict the
gray matter concentration in every voxel.
RESULTS
Comparison of meditators and non-meditators
In ROI analyses, gray matter concentration in the right
hippocampus (peak x, y, z: 38, 32, 12; t ¼ 3.77; P ¼ 0.027;
Figure 1) and right anterior insula (peak x, y, z: 36, 12, 6;
t ¼ 3.51; P ¼ 0.022) was significantly greater in meditators.
The cluster at the left inferior temporal gyrus (peak x, y, z:
49, 9, 28; t ¼ 3.88; P ¼ 0.058) showed a trend towards
significance.
We then created a mask for the left inferior temporal
gyrus based on the activation we found during mindfulness
of breathing meditation reported in Ho¨lzel et al. (2007).
To this end, the ROI was restricted to those voxels with
t > 4.25 in the functional data (corresponding to the
significance level reported in Table 3 in Ho¨lzel et al.,
2007). When investigating this search region, the greater gray
matter concentration for meditators was clearly significant
(peak x, y, z: 49, 8, 30; t ¼ 3.58; P ¼ 0.023).
The other structures tested in ROI analyses, namely the
DLPFC, ACC and left postcentral gyrus were not significant.
Controls did not show any cluster of greater gray matter
concentration compared to meditators.
An additional exploratory analysis of the group difference
in gray matter concentration at an  level of 0.05 corrected
for multiple comparisons for the whole brain yielded no
significant results.
Amount of practice
Masks derived from group comparison. We first tested the
effect of the amount of meditation training on gray matter
concentration in those areas found to differ between the
groups. In the identified regions within MARINA masks of
the left inferior temporal gyrus, right hippocampus and the
right anterior insula, mean values of gray matter probabilities were used as dependent variables and were predicted by
the total number of hours of meditation practice. A positive
and significant regression weight was obtained for the
left inferior temporal gyrus (r ¼ 0.40; P ¼ 0.04; one-tailed).
The correlation of mean values at the right anterior insula
and the hours of meditation training showed a trend toward
significance (r ¼ 0.36; P ¼ 0.06; one-tailed). Mean values in
the right hippocampus did not correlate with the hours of
meditation training.
Whole-brain. In order to detect further regions that
correlated with the amount of practice, voxel values within
the whole brain were correlated with the hours of meditation
training on an exploratory basis. A cluster of gray matter
concentration that was found to correlate with the amount
of meditation training was located in the bilateral gyrus
rectus and medial orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) (peak x, y, z: 1,
45, 16; t ¼ 4.28; cluster size: 185 voxels; Figure 2). It has to
be emphasized that this region was not significant when
correcting for the whole brain.
DISCUSSION
Meditation techniques are applied to train specific cognitive
functions (Hart, 1987). Task demands of different techniques are reflected in characteristic brain activation patterns
(Cahn and Polich, 2006; Lutz et al., 2007). The present study
revealed that meditators show increased gray matter
concentration in regions that are relevant for meditation.
Gray matter concentration was significantly greater for
meditators in the right hippocampus and the right anterior
insula and showed a trend towards significance in the left
inferior temporal gyrus. When isolating the area within
left inferior temporal gyrus previously shown to be active
during mindfulness meditation (Ho¨lzel et al., 2007),
meditators showed significantly greater gray matter concentration in this region. Although the clusters that showed a
group difference were relatively small (Figure 1) compared
to other VBM studies (Draganski et al., 2004; Mechelli et al.,
2004), results are clearly significant. Meditators mean gray
matter concentration within the relevant regions in the
left inferior temporal gyrus was predictable by the amount of
meditation training, corroborating the assumption of a
causal impact of meditation training on gray matter
concentration. The correlation of gray matter concentration
at the right insula and the amount of meditation practice
showed a trend towards significance. In an exploratory
whole brain regression analysis, the cumulated hours of
meditation training predicted gray matter concentration in
the medial OFC. The expected differences at the DLPFC,
ACC and left postcentral gyrus were not confirmed.
The right insula, which showed greater gray matter
concentration in meditators in our study and greater
thickness in the study by Lazar et al. (2005), is involved in
interoception and visceral awareness (Critchley et al., 2004).
This difference between meditators and non-meditators
presumably reflects the specific training during Vipassana
meditation, namely the awareness of bodily sensations (Hart,
1987). In a recent study, Farb et al. (2007) found that
participants trained in mindfulness showed increased
activation of viscerosomatic areas, including the right
insula, during a momentary experiential focus. This finding
further supports the crucial role of the insula for the
experience of a mindful state.
Further, our data confirmed the hypothesis that the
hippocampus exhibits greater gray matter concentration in
meditators. An investigation of subcortical structures was
not possible with the methods employed by Lazar et al.
(2007). The usage of VBM in the present study enabled us
to go beyond these limitations and made it possible to
confirm the group difference in the hippocampus. In their
neuropsychological model of meditation, Newberg and
Iversen (2003) ascribe an important role for meditative
experiences to the hippocampus, due to its involvement
in modulating cortical arousal and responsiveness. The
hippocampus also modulates amygdalar activity and its
involvement in attentional and emotional processes.
The region identified in the group comparison extends
into the parahippocampal region, which participates in
emotional memory and sensory functions (Suzuki, 1996)
and is the essential link between the hippocampus and
neocortex (de Curtis and Pare´, 2004). As activation of the
hippocampal/parahippocampal region has been found in
several meditation studies, including ours, we assume
that the repeated activation during meditation practice
leads to the altered gray matter structure in meditators.
Gray matter concentration in the left inferior temporal
gyrus not only differed between groups, but also significantly
correlated with the hours of meditation training, supporting the presumption that meditation training favors an
increase in gray matter in the left inferior temporal gyrus
resulting from repeated activation. Temporal lobe activation
during meditation has been found in several studies (Lou
et al., 1999; Lazar et al., 2000; Ho¨lzel et al., 2007), suggesting
it plays an important role in meditation (Previc, 2006).
The temporal lobe has been implicated in religious activity
and mystical experiences (Saver and Rabin, 1997), which
are characterized by the feeling of deep pleasure and the
experience of insight into the unity of all reality. While we
do not assume that the participants of the present study
experience mystical states, similar experiences are reported
by meditators during deep stages of meditation (Piron,
2001) and might be related to the structural differences.
However, this explanation remains tentative and has to be
tested in future investigations.
Data did not confirm the expected differences at the
DLPFC, ACC and left postcentral gyrus. Also, no effect of
meditation training has been found on the cortical thickness
in these regions (Lazar et al., 2005). Possibly, the activation
of these regions during meditation training does not lead
to alterations in cortical structure. It is conceivable that
some brain regions are more amenable to structural
modifications than others. It will be the task of future
studies to investigate this issue. It also has to be kept in mind
that the evidence on the functional neural correlates of
mindfulness practice is still limited. Different types of
meditation may recruit different neural networks. Only
few studies have investigated brain activation during mindfulness practice so far and more research is strongly needed
to identify relevant regions.
The exploratory whole-brain regression analysis revealed
that gray matter concentration in the medial OFC was
positively correlated with the cumulated hours of meditation
training. The OFC plays a crucial role in emotion regulation
(Quirk and Beer, 2006), during which it is thought to downregulate activity of the amygdala. Thickness of the medial
OFC is directly correlated with extinction retention after
fear conditioning, suggesting that its size might explain
individual differences in the ability to modulate fear (Milad
et al., 2005). It is thus critical for the modification of learned
emotional responses. Greater gray matter concentration
in the medial OFC dependent on meditation training
might reflect the improved ability to modify emotional
responses.
In an fMRI study, dispositional mindfulness was found
to predict activation of multiple PFC sites, including the
medial OFC, during an affect labeling task of facial
expressions (Creswell et al., 2007). These data suggest a
crucial role of the medial OFC for emotion regulation
capacities associated with dispositional mindfulness.
Mindfulness meditation training, which leads to greater
dispositional mindfulness (Brown and Ryan, 2003), might
strengthen those structures.
It has to be kept in mind that gray matter in the OFC
was not found to be greater in meditators than in nonmeditators in the present study. The absence of a group
difference in gray matter concentration in the OFC might
be a sample artifact. It is, however, also possible that
meditators compensate for an initially lower gray matter
concentration in the OFC with meditation practice. Future
studies should clarify this question. Finally, it has to be
emphasized that this effect is very small and a replication on
a larger sample is needed.
We assume the difference in gray matter concentration
between the groups to be an effect of the extensive
meditation training of meditators. However, the causal
direction of influence cannot be determined by this study.
Alternatively, people with greater gray matter in the relevant
regions might be prone to take up meditation practice.
Though correlational data provide support for the causal
role of meditation practice, it is possible that meditators
with greater gray matter concentration in the relevant
regions maintain practice for a longer period of time.
Randomized longitudinal studies could adequately address
this question. While groups were matched on gender,
age, education and handedness, uncontrolled systematic
differences between the two groups could have accounted
for the structural differences. Possible confounding
variables, such as personality profiles, drug and alcohol
consumption were not considered here, but should be
controlled in future research.
Both, the present study and the study by Lazar et al.
(2005) investigated participants who practice mindfulness
meditation. Samples had similar durations of meditation
practice. Yet, it has to be emphasized that our results are
not directly comparable to those of Lazar and colleagues
because different variables were measured: Lazar investigated
cortical thickness while our study examined gray matter
concentration. Only very few studies have compared cortical
thickness and gray matter concentration analyses so far
(Narr et al., 2005; Chung et al., 2007), and more investigation is required on the concordance of both measures.
To date, the physiological underpinnings of alterations in
gray matter structure on a histological or cellular level are
not yet sufficiently understood (May and Gaser, 2006) and
further research is strongly needed to investigate whether
modifications of cortical thickness and gray matter concentration are related to changes in neuropil, neuronal
size, dendritic or axonal arborization. Direct comparison
of anatomical MRI data and histological data could advance
the understanding of the mechanisms of structural
reorganization.
CONCLUSION
The present study showed a distinct pattern of gray matter
concentration in meditators, who spent a significant part
of their lifetime training non-judgmental acceptance towards
internal experiences that arise at each moment. Regular
meditation practice is associated with structural differences
in regions that are typically activated during meditation,
such as the inferior temporal gyrus and hippocampus as well
as in regions that are relevant for the task of meditation, such
as the insula and OFC. Using the whole-brain unbiased
objective technique of VBM (Mechelli et al., 2005), the
present study extends the findings by Lazar et al. (2005)
and suggests a wider network of brain regions involved
in meditation show long-term structural differences. Given
the rising interest in mindfulness-based programs for the
treatment of psychological disorders (Grossman et al., 2004),
the identification of structural correlates of intensive mindfulness training offers a promising approach for research
on the neurophysiological mechanisms underlying such
programs. Future studies should combine neuroscientific
and clinical streams of research for a better understanding of
the effects of such treatments.
Greater gray matter concentration for meditators compared to non-meditators (P < .001; uncorrected; > 20 voxels) in the left inferior temporal gyrus (upper left panel;
cluster size: 157 voxels), right anterior insula (lower left panel; cluster size: 22 voxels) and right hippocampus (upper right panel; cluster size: 106 voxels). MNI coordinates of
shown slices: x, y, z: 49, 32, 6; color bar indicates t-values.
Gray matter concentration at the medial orbitofrontal cortex correlates with total hours of meditation training. MNI coordinates of shown slices: x, y, z: 1, 45, 16; cluster
size: 185 voxels; color bar indicates t-values.
REFERENCES
Ashburner, J., Friston, K.J. (2000). Voxel-based morphometry: the methods.
Neuroimage, 11, 805–21.
Baer, R.A. (2003). Mindfulness training as a clinical intervention:
a conceptual and empirical review. Clinical Psychology: Science and
Practice, 10, 125–43.
Bishop, S.R., Lau, M., Shapiro, S., et al. (2004). Mindfulness: a proposed
operational definition. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 11,
230–41.
Brefczynski-Lewis, J.A., Lutz, A., Schaefer, H.S., et al. (2007). Neural
correlates of attentional expertise in long-term meditation practitioners.
Proceedings of the National Academy of the Sciences of the USA, 104,
11483–8.
Brown, K.W., Ryan, R.M. (2003). The benefits of being present: mindfulness
and its role in psychological well-being. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 84, 822–48.
Brown, K.W., Ryan, R.M., Creswell, J.D. (2007). Mindfulness: theoretical
foundations and evidence for its salutary effects. Psychological Inquiry, 18,
211–37.
Cahn, B.R., Polich, J. (2006). Meditation states and traits: EEG, ERP, and
neuroimaging studies. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 180–211.
Chung, M.K., Dalton, K.M., Shen, L., et al. (2007). Weighted fourier series
representation and its application to quantifying the amount of gray
matter. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 26, 566–81.
Creswell, J.D., Way, B.M., Eisenberger, N.I., et al. (2007). Neural correlates
of dispositional mindfulness during affect labeling. Psychosomatic
Medicine, 69, 560–5.
Critchley, H.D., Wiens, S., Rotshtein, P., et al. (2004). Neural systems
supporting interoceptive awareness. Nature neuroscience, 7, 189–95.
de Curtis, M., Pare´, D. (2004). The rhinal cortices: a wall of inhibition
between the neocortex and the hippocampus. Progress in Neurobiology,
74, 101–10.
Draganski, B., Gaser, C., Busch, V., et al. (2004). Changes in gray matter
induced by training. Nature, 427, 311–2.
Farb, N.A.S., Segal, Z.V., Mayberg, H., et al. (2007). Attending to
the present: meditation reveals distinct neural modes of self-reference.
Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 2, 313–322.
Gaser, C. VBM2 (for SPM2). [Computer software]. Available at: http://dbm.
neuro.uni-jena.de/vbm/vbm2-for-spm2/ (accessed on 30 May, 2007).
Good, C.D., Johnsrude, I.S., Ashburner, J., et al. (2001). A voxel-based
morphometric study of ageing in 465 normal adult human brains.
Neuroimage, 14, 21–36.
Grossman, P., Niemann, L., Schmidt, S., et al. (2004). Mindfulness-based
stress reduction and health benefits: a meta-analysis. Journal of
Psychosomatic Research, 57, 35–43.
Hart, W. (1987). The Art of Living: Vipassana-Meditation as Taught by
S.N. Goenka. San Francisco, CA: Harper and Row.
Ho¨lzel, B., Ott, U., Hempel, H., et al. (2007). Differential engagement of
anterior cingulate and adjacent medial frontal cortex in adept meditators
and non-meditators. Neuroscience Letters, 421, 16–21.
Jha, A.P., Krompinger, J., Baime, M. (2007). Mindfulness training modifies
subsystems of attention. Cognitive, Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience,
7, 109–19.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (2003). Mindfulness-based interventions in context: past,
present, and future: Commentaries. Clinical Psychology: Science and
Practice, 10, 144–60.
Lazar, S.W., Bush, G., Gollub, R.L., et al. (2000). Functional brain mapping
of the relaxation response and meditation. Neuroreport, 11, 1–5.
Lazar, S.W., Kerr, C.E., Wasserman, R.H., et al. (2005). Meditation
experience is associated with increased cortical thickness. Neuroreport, 16,
1893–7.
Lou, H.C., Kjaer, T.W., Friberg, L., et al. (1999). A 15 O-H2O PET study of
meditation and the resting state of normal consciousness. Human Brain
Mapping, 7, 98–105.
Lutz, A., Dunne, J.D., Davidson, R.J. (2007). Meditation and the
neuroscience of consciousness: an introduction. In: Zelazo, P.,
Moscovitch, M., Thompson, E., editors. Cambridge Handbook of
Consciousness, Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, pp. 499–554.
May, A., Gaser, C. (2006). Magnetic resonance-based morphometry: a
window into structural plasticity of the brain. Current Opinion in
Neurology, 19, 407–11.
May, A., Hajak, G., Ga¨nßbauer, S., et al. (2007). Structural brain alterations
following 5 days of intervention: dynamic aspects of neuroplasticity.
Cerebral Cortex, 17, 205–10.
Mechelli, A., Crinion, J.T., Noppeney, U., et al. (2004). Structural plasticity
in the bilingual brain. Nature, 431, 757.
Mechelli, A., Price, C.J., Friston, K.J., et al. (2005). Voxel-based
morphometry of the human brain: methods and applications.
Current Medical Imaging Reviews, 1, 105–13.
Milad, M.R., Quinn, B.T., Pitman, R.K., et al. (2005). Thickness of
ventromedial prefrontal cortex in humans is correlated with extinction
memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of the Sciences of the USA,
102, 10706–11.
Narr, K.L., Bilder, R.M., Toga, A.W., et al. (2005). Mapping cortical
thickness and gray matter concentration in first episode schizophrenia.
Cerebral Cortex, 15, 708–19.
Newberg, A.B., Iversen, J. (2003). The neural basis of the complex mental
task of meditation: neurotransmitter and neurochemical considerations.
Medical Hypotheses, 61, 282–91.
Piron, H. (2001). The meditation depth index (MEDI) and the meditation
depth questionnaire (MEDEQ). Journal for Meditation and Meditation
Research, 1, 69–92.
Previc, F.H. (2006). The role of the extrapersonal brain systems in religious
activity. Consciousness and Cognition, 15, 500–39.
Quirk, G.J., Beer, J.S. (2006). Prefrontal involvement in the regulation of
emotion: convergence of rat and human studies. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 16, 723–7.
Saver, J.L., Rabin, J. (1997). The neural substrates of religious
experience. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 9,
498–510.
Slagter, H.A., Lutz, A., Greischar, L.L., et al. (2007). Mental
training affects distribution of limited brain resources. PLoS Biology, 5,
e138.
Suzuki, W.A. (1996). The anatomy, physiology and functions of the
perirhinal cortex. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 6, 179–86.
Tzourio-Mazoyer, N., Landeau, B., Papathanassiou, D., et al. (2002).
Automated anatomical labeling of activation in SPM using a macroscopic
anatomical parcellation of the MNI MRI single-subject brain.
Neuroimage, 15, 273–89.
Walter, B., Blecker, C., Kirsch, P., et al. (2003). MARINA: an easy to use
tool for the creation of MAsks for Region of INterest Analyses
[abstract]. Presented at the 9th International Conference on Functional
Mapping of the Human Brain, June 19-22, 2003, New York, NY.
Available on CD-Rom in Neuroimage 19, No. 2. Available at http://
www.bion.de/download.htm.