Annals of Leisure ResearchISSN: 1174-5398 (Print) 2159-6816 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ranz20The Motivations of Baby Boomers to Participate in Adventure Tourism and the Implications for Adventure Tour ProvidersIan Patterson & Rebecca PanTo cite this article: Ian Patterson & Rebecca Pan (2007) The Motivations of Baby Boomers to Participate in Adventure Tourism and the Implications for Adventure Tour Providers, Annals of Leisure Research, 10:1, 26-53, DOI: 10.1080/11745398.2007.9686753To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/11745398.2007.9686753  Published online: 19 Sep 2011.  Submit your article to this journal  Article views: 864 View related articles  Citing articles: 9 View citing articles          Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ranz20
The Motivations of Baby Boomers to Participate in Adventure Tourism and the Implications for Adventure Tour ProvidersIan Patterson Associate Professor School of Tourism, University of Queensland, Brisbane, AustraliaRebecca Pan, Graduate Student, Master of Business, School of Tourism, University of Queensland, Brisbane, AustraliaABSTRACT ¡E One of the emerging growth areas of tourism is so-called ¡¥adven- ture¡¦ tourism. Adventure tourism has recently attracted the interest of older people, including a new generation of baby boomers. This trend has been attrib- uted to the fact that many baby boomers are generally healthier, more financially well off, better educated and have a greater desire for novelty, escape and authentic experiences than previous cohorts of older people. Many baby boomer and senior adult groups are opting for more physically challenging and adrenalin-driven activities, preferring soft adventure activities rather than passive activities such as sightseeing tours and shopping. This study investigates why older tourists want to participate in adventure tourism and makes recom- mendations for tour providers about how to improve services for older people. A total of 14 people who were aged 50 years and older were interviewed using a qualitative research methodology. The results found that the most significant motive for adventure travel was the need to escape from their everyday routine by interjecting it with elements of adventure. Furthermore, the experience of seeing different landscapes, wildlife and native plants as well as going to places where few people had previously ventured was also an important motive. With this in mind, adventure tour providers need to keep their prices competitive and to place greater emphasis on safety and to use experienced guides. Shorter daytrips with less intensity should also be provided for older travellers.
IntroductionOur world is rapidly aging. The United Nations estimates that over two billion people will be aged 60 years and over by the year 2050, and this will account for 22 per cent (or 1:5) of the world¡¦s population compared to only 10 per cent in 2000 (United Nations, 2000). These demographic shifts will be seen across all continents, including Australia, where numbers of older people who are aged 65 years and older will increase from around 12 per cent in 1999, to between 24 per cent and 26 per cent in 2051 (ABS, 1999).   Because of this rapid increase in numbers of older people, one of the direct consequences of this change in demography is that there will be greater numbers of older people who will want to travel, and as a result, be responsible for a larger share of overall holiday spending compared to younger age groups. For example, in 1999 over 593 million international travellers were aged 60 years and over, and they accounted for around a third of all holiday spending by this segment. By 2050 this figure is projected to increase to be greater than two billion trips (World Tourism Organisation, 2001).   As a result, the tourism and leisure industry has begun to change its marketing priorities to more seriously targeting people aged 65 years and over because they are now seen as having larger amounts of free time and discretionary income to spend on travel compared to younger age groups (Javalgi, Thomas, & Rao, 1992). In addition, most baby boomers (who were born between 1946 and 1964) perceive themselves to be younger in age and in outlook than their chronological age, more in control of their lives, and increasingly self-reliant (Cleaver & Muller, 2002). Because of this, they are demanding new and different leisure experiences that are challenging and often adventure based (Hudson, 2003; Patterson, 2002).   This study explores the main motivations that have led to an increased interest in adventure tourism activities in exotic locations by older people. Adventure tourism is seen as a form of tourism that has an element of risk and danger, and provides the traveller with a sense of challenge and exhila- ration. Previously, the adventure tourism market was mainly made up of younger people who were typically more daring, and who constantly sought out activities that were dangerous and thrilling. However, more recently older people are becoming increasingly lured by the excitement of adventure tourism, and the reasons why this is occurring has formed the basis for this study. That is, to gain a greater insight into why older people want to partic- ipate in adventure tourism and to examine what are the implications for commercial tour providers to help them to provide for this increased demand.
   For the purposes of this study, we will be using the terms ¡¥baby boomers¡¦ and ¡¥seniors¡¦ interchangeably throughout. Because of this, we have defined older adventure travellers based on their chronological age, that is 50 years and older. Firstly, we will look at how adventure tourism is defined and the two main types of adventure tourism ¡X soft and hard adventure.Definition of adventure tourismSwarbooke, Beard, Leckie and Pomfret (2003) concluded that adventure should not be defined according to the specific activities that are undertaken, but more by the state of mind or approach of the participant. However, there is little doubt that adventure denotes action; it is not a passive experience and is generally found to be engaging and absorbing. Adventure also involves effort and commitment, and often mental and physical preparation or train- ing is necessary. An adventure is by its very nature a risky undertaking. Sung (2004: 345) in a more recent study concluded that activity, experience and the environment were the main attractions of adventure travel: ¡¥That is, an individual would be engaged in adventure travel for the purpose of gaining pleasure and personal meaning (experience) through participation in leisure pursuits in a specific setting (environment)¡¦.   Furthermore, the adventure experience can differ as it is made up of a number of different dimensions such as the type of travel, group member- ship, and/or the amount and spectrum of risk (Ewert & Jamieson, 2003) (Figure 1). That is, the participant can engage in the adventure activity along several dimensions, such as the location (a remote wilderness trip travelling alone, versus a trip to Cancun as a member of a cruise ship), and this suggests that there are different levels and types of risk and danger that need to be seriously considered (Bentley & Page, 2001).Types of adventureSeveral authors have distinguished between different types and levels of adventure activities, categorising them as either ¡¥soft¡¦ or ¡¥hard¡¦ adventure, and placing them at opposite ends of the adventure spectrum (Figure 2).Soft adventureHill (1995) defined soft adventure as activities that are usually suitable for family involvement as well as providing an introduction to new and unique experiences. This might involve whitewater rafting in oar-powered boats on class 2 or class 3 rivers, horseback riding on a guided breakfast ride, or hot- air ballooning with a commercial provider. Miller (2003: 2) described several types of soft adventure type activities that older people might like to partici-
Figure 1. The Adventure Tourism Experience (Ewert & Jamieson, 2003: 69)
¡E Highly controlled¡E Low uncertainty¡E High amenities¡E High safety¡E Relatively low risk¡E 
Highly adventurous¡E High uncertainty¡E Low amenities¡E Low safety¡E Relatively high risk
Figure 2. Differences between soft and hard adventure (Hill, 1995)
pate in: ¡¥Hiking the Scottish Highlands, biking across France, riding [on] horseback across Mongolia, braving the rough Drake Passage to Antarctica, taking a walking safari in Zambia or canoe travel in Zimbabwe. Now they¡¦re even paddling the coastlines of the Fiji Islands, where once the main draw was watching the scenery from a beach chair while sipping a tropical drink¡¦.Hard adventureIn contrast, hard adventure requires advanced-level skills that are generally used when faced with dangerous situations. Participants usually participate because of a deep interest and extensive experience in an adventure activity that is usually beyond the confines of a commercial provider. This may include climbing Yosemite¡¦s El Capitan, rafting Cataract Canyon in a private group, or hang-gliding in the Telluride cirque (Hill, 1995).   Millington, Locke and Locke (2001) stated that the main difference between hard and soft adventure was that hard adventure requires previous experience and proficiency in the activity prior to the tourism experience, whereas soft adventure does not necessarily involve the need for previous experience.Table 1. Examples of hard and soft adventure activities(Ewert & Jamieson, 2003: 69)Hard Activities	Soft Activities Rock and mountain climbing	 Camping Snorkelling/SCUBA diving	 BikingCaving	Flat water canoeingWhitewater boating	Photo safarisWilderness backpacking	Day hikingMotivations for adventure tourismMotivation has been defined in the psychological literature as ¡¥an inner state that energises, channels, and sustains human behaviour to achieve goals¡¦ (Pizam, Neumann, & Reichel, 1979: 195). In other words, motives are internal to the individual and help to guide or direct behaviour so that personal goals are achieved and thereby to bring satisfaction and enjoyment to the individual.   The motivations for leisure travel have received considerable attention in the literature over the past two decades (Kim, Weaver, & McCleary, 1996). Tourist motivations have been regarded as important in helping to explain
tourist behaviour (Iso-Ahola, 1989). To Iso-Ahola (1989), tourism motiva- tions are seen as the process of escaping personal and/or interpersonal environments and seeking out personal and/or interpersonal intrinsic rewards. Iso-Ahola based his theories on the work of Deci (1975), who was the first theorist to acknowledge that there was a distinction between intrin- sic (internal drives) and extrinsic motivation (external or environmental drives). Intrinsic motivation is defined as ¡¥the inherent tendency to seek out novelty and challenges, to extend and exercise one¡¦s capabilities, to explore and to learn¡¦ (Ryan & Deci, 2000: 69). Thus to Iso-Ahola (1989: 55), tourist behaviour is the ¡¥interplay of forces ¡X avoidance of routine or stressful envi- ronments and seeking recreation places for certain psychological rewards¡¦.   Therefore, intrinsic motivation is at the heart of play and leisure behav- iour, offering unlimited opportunities to achieve feelings of excitement, anticipation and expectations of enjoyment. To be free to choose the leisure or travel experience, or as it is known ¡¥perceived freedom¡¦, is also a critical prerequisite for travel behaviour (Iso-Ahola, 1989). Thus, when extrinsic constraining factors occur, such as being forced to travel for family obliga- tions, or if people are on a tight travelling schedule this can become stressful, and as a result their motivation to travel will be significantly reduced as it is not seen as intrinsically motivated behaviour.   Intrinsically motivated behaviour facilitates people¡¦s attempts to pursue and achieve optimal levels of sensory stimulation and arousal, such as feel- ings of flow that are seen as inherently pleasurable and satisfying (Csikzentmihalyi, 1990). Tourists live for the present, a conceptualisation that explains their desire for instant gratification, thrill and ¡¥buzz¡¦ of the moment such as through adventure activities (Hudson, 2003). Before delv- ing into the major motivations that encourage seniors to engage in adventure tourism, the following diagram explains the differences between seeking, and escaping from, the leisure experience (Figure 3).Figure 3. The seeking and escaping dimensions of leisure motivation (Iso-Ahola, 1989: 262)Seeking Personal Rewards
Escaping Interpersonal Environments
Seeking Interpersonal Rewards
Escaping Personal Environments
Iso-Ahola¡¦s model illustrates how people can use leisure to escape from both their personal and interpersonal worlds. The former refers to escape from personal problems, troubles and failures as well as escaping from everyday routines. To run away from the interpersonal world means that one is escap- ing routine social contacts (such as co-workers, boss or family members). However, when escaping these worlds one is also seeking intrinsic rewards (such as friends or tour buddies) that are not the source of problems that they are escaping from.   Another approach to define tourist motivations has been through studies that have been based on consumer-based research focusing on the analysis of choice sets and consumer decision making (Sonmez & Graefe, 1998). Hall and McArthur (1991) attributed the desire to participate in adventure tourism to four consumer-based decisions: adventure, safety, perception of the environment, and economic considerations. Uncertainty and risk are also highly regarded as key elements of the adventure experience; however, participants also placed a high priority on safety considerations (e.g., compe- tence of guides, condition of rafts, past safety record with whitewater rafting) in adventure experiences. For example, Fluker and Turner (2000) discussed the role of activity risk as a main motivator for people undertaking whitewa- ter rafting. Weiler and Hall (1992) further described the motivations for adventure tourism as improved physical wellbeing, social contact, risk seek- ing and self-discovery resulting from the experience. However, for a more detailed examination of the main motivations for adventure tourism it is necessary to categorise them according to intrinsic and extrinsic dimensions.Intrinsic motivations for adventure tourism1. To re-live their youthThere is a strong desire for older people to feel younger, or at least to relive some of the experiences that characterised their youth. No matter how well people take care of themselves as they move chronologically through their lives, old age will become increasingly and inescapably more apparent with the physical changes that take place in their face and bodies (Hepworth, 2004). Adventure tourism can trigger strong feelings of longing for the past when they were younger and derived great enjoyment and satisfaction from engaging in activities that were risky or physically challenging (Hinch & Higham, 2004).   Today, many older adults take a proactive approach towards ageing by embracing life by living it to the fullest, and doing as many things as possi- ble while they are physically capable and have clarity of mind. Subjective age has become more important than chronological age for baby boomers in the
twenty-first century. Markides and Boldt (1983) found that the main differ- ence between felt age (or subjective age) and actual age (or chronological age) was 10.2 years. That is, seniors typically felt a decade younger than what their actual age was, and placed great deal on the importance on having fun and enjoyment in their lives, preferring to experience or enjoy vacation activ- ities with younger people. Males have a greater desire than females to holiday with much younger age groups, and they often coloured their hair and/or underwent cosmetic surgery to enhance their appearance and to remove signs of ageing. This age difference becomes larger as one ages, as research by Menlo Consulting Group found that on average US travellers who were aged 80 years often thought of themselves as having a mean age of 65 years (Smith & Jenner, 1997). This suggests that people do not perceive themselves as old until they reach at least 75 years or older (Sherman & Cooper, 1988).2. Provide an alternative to boredomOlder adults want to ¡¥seize the moment¡¦ and take holidays that are more chal- lenging and less passive in nature while they are still mobile and fit, leaving relaxing holidays to when they are becoming older and frailer (Bierman, 2005). There are a myriad of ways that people find meaning in life and there are countless avenues to approach a ¡¥good life¡¦ after retirement (Firestone, Firestone, & Cartlett, 2003). Adventure travel can provide an alternative to a boring retirement routine and by its very nature, seniors are able to receive physical and social stimulation by being in the company of different types of people, as well as discovering new destinations and experiences relatively unknown settings that are seen to be exotic outdoor locations (Golik, 1999). They want to escape from the demands of their daily life and responsibilities, and high on their agenda is fun and enjoyment as well as gaining self-respect that can be achieved through adventure tourism (Cleaver, Muller, Ruys, & Wei, 1999).3. To provide continuity to lifeIn many ways, older people display continuity between their past and pres- ent in their basic leisure activities, interests and values (Coleman, 1995). Atchley (1999) found that most people continue to participate in similar kinds of activities in retirement as they did when they were working (he referred to this as ¡¥Continuity Theory¡¦) as it concentrates people¡¦s energies in familiar domains. In the process of maintaining a basic level of physical and mental activity, it is not surprising that seniors still choose to take part in physically and mentally challenging adventure holidays (Swarbrooke, Beard, Leckie, & Pomfret, 2003).
   As people begin to approach the latter part of their lives, there is a strong tendency to search for self-fulfilling activities and experiences as they contemplate the reality that there is only so much time left to live. Muller (1997) predicted that because of this realignment of values and search for self-fulfilment, seniors have a greater propensity to take part in discovery tourism, of which adventure tourism is a major component. This may also help to delay the onset of ill health through leading a healthy lifestyle, which is now becoming more common among baby boomers. Feeling physically healthy may provide seniors with the feeling that they can do anything, such as adventure tourism activities that are generally more physically and mentally demanding.4. Physically challenging and funOthers want to experience a range of new and exciting adventure experiences and are eager to combine this with overseas and/or domestic travel. This provides older adults with stimulation from receiving physical and intellec- tually challenging experiences as well as learning through ¡¥hands on¡¦ experiences about different cultures and ancient civilisations. Adventure tourism involves stepping out of one¡¦s comfort zone, and often requires a great deal of determination and mental fortitude as even soft adventure expe- riences can stretch the limits of one¡¦s endurance, while at the same time encouraging older tourists to back for more.5. Social supportSocial support has a positive effect on older people¡¦s psychological wellbeing and mental health. For many seniors, achieving their adventure goals also results in social validation (Hudson, 2003). During an adventure tour, there will be times when older people will be tested physically and mentally, while at other times, self-doubt and fear prevent them from progressing any further. In these times, it is comforting to receive encouragement and support from one¡¦s peer group. In addition, married couples in particular enjoy the experience of forming new friendships with older singles or couples who are similar ages to themselves (Naida, Shaw & Cook, 1997).6. Sense of achievementThe emotions that surface from adventure tourism not only include feelings of fun and enjoyment, but also a sense of achievement at having done some- thing that no one was expecting an older person to do. Stereotypes have previously suggested that older adults were ¡¥over the hill¡¦ or on the way down; generally uninterested in new things and experiences; somewhat frail
and ailing and as a result were incapable of handling the strenuous aspects of travel, much less adventure travel (Cleaver et al., 1999). Because of these negative stereotypes, many seniors were often constrained by the expecta- tions of others that discouraged them from having fun through challenging activities (Hepworth, 2004). However, today these stereotypes are disappear- ing as more older adults are actively participating in adventure tourism and aiming to ¡¥achieve something unexpected, perhaps even something previ- ously unimagined¡¦ (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990: 46).Extrinsic motivations for adventure tourism1. Better healthBaby boomers are generally enjoying better health and longer life expectan- cies than previous generations, which has been attributed to advancements in medical science and improved health care (Ruys & Wei, 1995). There are an array of measures associated with a healthy lifestyle that many older people have adopted to prevent or postpone the onset of disease and disabil- ity. These include a balanced diet, regular exercise, adequate time for relaxation and sleep, avoidance of tobacco and drugs, moderate use of alco- hol, mental stimulation and regular social contact, as well as easy access to preventive and medical services (Satariano, 1997).2. Higher incomesSeniors are generally financially better off than previous cohorts of the same age. In Australia for example, baby boomers generally have higher incomes than the average, and are over represented in the highest household income quintile, with 63 per cent of married baby boomers being dual income couples. They also have greater financial freedom from mortgage debt and a substantial amount of savings (Muller, 1997; Patterson, 2002). Older people who are aged 60 years and older often enjoy higher discretionary incomes because they have fewer outgoing expenses. Housing is generally a major expense for the average Australian; however, nearly 80 per cent of seniors in Australia aged above 60 years of age own their own home, while only 4.9 per cent have dependent children living at home. These factors when combined reduce financial commitments and increase the amount of discretionary income that can be spent on travel (Golik, 1999).3. More free time and discountsSeniors can make substantial savings on their travel and this has proved to be an added incentive. For example, many seniors have retired or work part- time and because of this, they are free to travel during the off-peak season
and receive substantial discounts on travel compared to younger people with children who generally have to travel during the school holidays. Often, companies offer discounts and special deals for seniors who are aged 50 years of age and older who travel in the off-peak and shoulder seasons. For exam- ple, Thrifty Car Rentals offers a 10 per cent discount to anyone aged 55 years and older. Travellers can also purchase books of airline coupons valid for travel in a certain regions of the USA (Brooks, 1994).SummaryThe research literature suggests that both extrinsic and intrinsic motivations act together as powerful motivators for adventure travel by older people. The main motivators for older people are the intrinsic rewards and satisfactions that are associated with helping older people to feel young again, and to increase feelings of achievement, fun and enjoyment, the forming of new social bonds and friendships as well as providing an outlet for older people to escape from the boredom or alienation of their work or retirement. Extrinsic motivators such as feeling fit and healthy as well as increased wealth through better pension and superannuation schemes provide the financial means to permit older people to undertake adventure travel. The process of exploring older people¡¦s motivations is a complex one, and this study provides a comprehensive examination of older people¡¦s motivations to participate in adventure tourism activities.Research questionsBased on this literature review the following research questions were developed:? What are the main motives of older people to participate in adventure tourism?? Do intrinsic motives play a more significant role than extrinsic motives in influencing older people to participate in adventure tourism?? Are older people who participate in adventure tourism experiences more likely to participate in further adventure tourism experiences in the future?? How well do adventure tourism providers cater for the needs of older people and what can they do to improve adventure experiences for older people?
MethodsResearch designThe purpose of this study was to explore different perspectives and meanings about the motives for older people¡¦s participation in adventure tourism. This study uses a quantitative approach as motivations are seen as intangible and complex and not something that the researcher can quantify or infer by observation. In addition, tourist journeys that are motivated by just one motive are very rare (Vukonic, 1996). In order to gain deeper insights into the motivations of particular behaviours, researchers need to be able to inter- act and communicate with the actual person involved in the adventure tourism experience.   Qualitative research uses an interpretative paradigm. The interpretive model is one that places more reliance on the people being studied, provid- ing their own explanations of their situation or behaviour (Veal, 2006). This research tradition usually involves qualitative methods and is generally regarded as an inductive approach. This is because it asks questions such as ¡¥why¡¦ and ¡¥how¡¦, follows a flexible research design, explains causality, and develops theory (Gratton & Jones, 2004). The data that are collected in qual- itative research are in the form of words that need to be interpreted by the researcher, and do not involve numbers, or are not based on statistics. This approach involves gathering large amounts of relatively detailed information such as feelings, thoughts or experiences from relatively few cases (Veal, 2006).   The data collection used an interview schedule consisting of 19 questions that were based on the research literature, where participants were able to describe the situation in their own words and in their own time. In a quali- tative study, the main aim is to have a more complete understanding of the motivating factors that influence older adults to participate in adventure tourism experiences. The objective of this study is to discover variation, portray shades of meaning and to examine complexity.The sampleA purposive sample of 14 older adults who were aged between 50 and 80 years agreed to be interviewed because they had taken part in a ¡¥soft¡¦ or ¡¥hard¡¦ adventure tourism experience during the past twelve months. The partici- pants were volunteers sourced from a database that has been established by the Australasian Centre on Ageing, at the University of Queensland. The Centre has established a 50+ Registry, which is a database of people who are 50 years and older who were willing to participate in the University of Queensland¡¦s various research projects about ageing. One hundred letters
were mailed to these volunteers informing them about the study and asking if they would participate based on certain criteria; that is, that they had undertaken an adventure tourism experience during the last 12 months. A final total of 14 older people returned acceptance forms indicating that they fulfilled the criteria for selection, and agreed to be interviewed for the study.Interview scheduleAn interview schedule was developed which consisted of 19 open-ended questions that were based on a review of the literature related to the previ- ously stated research questions. The studies by the following researchers were used to develop suitable themes, including questions for this research study:1. Motivations for seniors to take part in adventure tourism are mainly intrinsically motivating behaviour (Golik, 1999).2. Reminiscence played an important role in the face of losses of role and function in older age (Coleman, 1995).3. Older people display great continuity between the past and present in their basic activities, interests and values (Atchley, 1999).4. People seek out experiences that provide a reprieve from the boredom or stress from everyday life (Iso-Ahola, 1989).5. Social interaction is important for seniors as a motive for participating in adventure tourism (Naida et a.,1997).6. Achievement motivation is important for older people to demonstrate to others their physical abilities; in doing so, seniors want to break down the negative stereotypes surrounding them (McClelland, Atkinson, Clark, & Lowell, 1953).A pilot test was conducted with three participants to test the suitability of the wording, and the time needed to complete the interview. Several of the ques- tions were modified based on the responses from the respondents. The time needed to complete the survey varied from 40 minutes to one hour depend- ing on how long the respondent took to answer the questions.Data collection methodsMost of the interviews were conducted at the Australasian Centre for Ageing, at the University of Queensland; however, two separate interviews were undertaken in the respondents¡¦ homes. Before the interview began, the inter- viewees signed a consent form allowing the researchers to audio record the interview. The researchers stressed the confidential nature of the study and
the right of participants to withdraw at any stage if they felt uncomfortable with any of the questions. The completed transcripts were filed in a locked cabinet to which only the researchers had access. The respondents name was not used in the research and numbers were allocated to each interview sched- ule to respect respondents¡¦ anonymity.Data analysisAnalysing qualitative data is often time consuming as the procedure involves the researchers manually reading over the responses, organising the individ- ual responses into categories, and identifying the links between the responses (Henderson & Bialeschki, 2002). The analysis followed similar procedures as suggested by Miles and Huberman (2002). The first step was to transcribe the recordings of the interviews and read through the transcripts. The next step involved reducing and organising the large amount of qualitative data by coding, discarding irrelevant data, and writing summaries of several responses that were collected. Coding is the first stage of providing some logical structure to the data. Gratton and Jones (2004) have suggested the following stages in the process of data coding that was followed:? Open coding: data is carefully read, all statements relating to the research questions are identified, and each is assigned a code or category. These codes are then noted and each relevant statement is organised under the appropriate code on the computer along with any notes or memos that the researchers wished to add.? Axial coding: the researchers read the qualitative data and searched the statements that fitted into the categories. Further codes were developed during this stage.? Selective coding: the researchers became more analytical and looked for patterns and explanations in the codes. They also looked for cases that confirmed or contradicted the research questions.The next step was to search for patterns or emergent themes. This process involved looking for data units that illustrated or described the situation that the researchers were interested in. Conclusions and recommendations were then presented based on the researchers¡¦ interpretation of results. Direct quotes were also used to support or exemplify the findings (Gratton & Jones, 2004).
Demographic characteristicsThe 14 respondents consisted of 12 females and 2 males. The majority of the respondents were in the age group 50¡V59 years (36%) and 60¡V69 years (42.6%), while 14% were 70 to 79 years and only 7% were 80 to 89 years old. Half of the respondents lived alone, either because they were single or widowed, while 43% lived with their spouse, only a small per cent of the respondents lived with their children and/or grandchildren.   Half of the respondents were married while 15% were widowed; 21% were single and 14% were divorced. More than half (57%) had children, while the remainder (43%) did not have children because they had never married, or chose to be single. Half of the respondents worked full-time, while 36% worked part-time, and 14% were retired. Several retirees chose to go back into the workforce on a part-time basis because they wanted to remain in touch with the working world and to keep their minds active.   A total of 12 (86%) of the respondents chose to go on ¡¥soft¡¦ adventure tours such as camping or hiking on gradually changing terrain. Only 2 (14%) of respondents preferred ¡¥hard¡¦ adventure tours such as black-water rafting and hang-gliding. Almost a half of the respondents (43%) travelled with their spouse, while almost a third (29%) of the respondents travelled with friends who shared similar interests. Only a small number (14%) travelled alone or with others, such as in a tour group. Half of the respondents (50%) chose to tour in locations that were interstate, 21% toured within Queensland while the remainder (29%) chose to travel overseas. For those who chose to travel interstate, the Kimberley Region in Western Australia was rated as the most popular, followed by Darwin and other parts of the Northern Territory. For those who chose to tour within Queensland, the Gulf of Carpentaria was a popular destination because of its scenic beauty, while Europe and North America were the two most popular continents for those who chose to travel overseas.   Over two-thirds (71%) of respondents chose to make their own arrange- ments for their tours by travelling in a four-wheel-drive (4WD) or finding their own flights. A total of 29% of respondents preferred that their adven- ture tour company make all the travel arrangements. Over one-third of respondents (36%) chose to go on tours that were between two and three weeks, while 29% chose to go on tours that were one week or less. With longer tours, 21% of respondents spent up to eight and a half weeks away, while only a small percentage of respondents (14%), went on tours that were between one and two weeks long.
ResultsResearch Question 1Intrinsic motivations for adventure travelThe major themes that emerged from the data were the need to escape so as to avoid boredom in their lives; to experience nature; to enjoy a sense of adventure by being physically challenged by the adventure experience. Minor themes of lesser importance were the need to form new friendships and social support; to feel younger and to be with younger people; and the need to break down negative stereotypes of older people.Escapism and relief from boredomThe most important reason was simply ¡¥to get away from it all¡¦. For respon- dents that indicated that they needed to get away from it all, it was generally a case of getting away from the routine of their everyday lives by interjecting it with elements of adventure, or going as far away from ¡¥civilisation¡¦ as possi- ble, rather than escaping from the aspects of their lives that made them unhappy. Therefore, escapism was a major factor in influencing respondents¡¦ decisions to participate but they felt that they were not escaping from bore- dom or stress, but occasionally they required a change of environment. Golik (1999) suggested that adventure travel provides an important break in the retirement routine.   All but one of the respondents indicated that they did not lead stressful lives, and although their typical day was never boring, they remarked that they needed a break from their daily routine. Linda summarised a sentiment that all respondents shared: ¡¥I consciously choose how I live each moment of the day, be it taking a nap, watching a sunset or going on a holiday¡¦. Lipscombe (1995) found that people were motivated by the desire to escape from mundane urban routines to relatively unknown settings, usually outdoors, of which familiarity and knowledge was generally very low.   More than half of the respondents did not miss paid work and the stresses that it brought to their lives. However, several respondents missed their work mates and the camaraderie that they had developed with their colleagues. As a result, they often returned to work on a part-time basis, enabling them to keep active and in touch with the working world that had been a major part of their identity for a large part of their lives.   Other respondents stated that they had taken up new hobbies during retirement, that they now had time to commit to ¡X such as learning to sing opera, painting, writing children¡¦s books, gardening and even new interests such as birdwatching and botany. Several of the respondents had formed new
clubs or joined existing ones such as Mind Ventures, National Seniors, the Moreton Bay Nature Club and the Adventurers Club. All respondents did not have to take care of their grandchildren on a regular basis and if they did, many felt it would severely restrict their lifestyle because they would not be able to do what they wanted to do, whenever they wanted to do it.Experiencing natural scenery and spiritual aspectsThe experience of ¡¥seeing different things¡¦, ¡¥being one with nature¡¦ and ¡¥enjoy- ing the beautiful scenery¡¦ was the second most important motive that influenced respondents to participate in adventure tours. This was the high- light of the trip for many respondents who enjoyed experiencing different landscapes wildlife and exotic plants as well as meeting people from all walks of life. The thrill of travelling to places that few people had been before was also a highlight for several respondents as was the adventure itself. Helen (59 years) expressed this viewpoint in these terms:¡¥Getting as close to nature as possible, going to where few have ventured before and seeing the wonders that nature has created such as waterfalls and rock formations, and animals in their natural environment is very important to me¡¦.   A shift in attitudes and lifestyle was also seen to be a significant factor in influencing respondents to participate in adventure tours. Many felt that participation in adventure tours helped them realise that there was more to life than just making money and spending it. Esther, who is 56 years old, stated, ¡¥Going on my trip really made me think twice about what is important in life. When I stand there and look into the nothingness it made me realise how short life is to just spend it worrying about things like money¡¦. Being one with nature and meeting people from all walks of life, many of whom were much less fortunate than they were, was seen to be more important. Thus the theme of ¡¥feeling insignificant compared to the rest of the world¡¦, and that they felt very lucky to have what they had, compared to others who have to live with so much less and yet still led a contented life, was voiced by several respondents.Experiencing a sense of adventureMany expressed the fact that they still had an adventurous spirit and indi- cated that adventure tours were the only types of holidays that they wanted to go on. Swarbrooke et al. (2003) suggested that it is not age per se that draws the line between pleasure (passive) tourism and adventure (active) tourism, but rather a person¡¦s attitude, or spirit of adventure and enthusiasm. Maria, 69 years old, summarised this by stating that she was ¡¥fulfilling her adventurous spirit¡¦ as the best way to explain why she went on adventure
tours. Joy (62 years) also stated that going on adventure tours still gave her an adrenaline rush that she enjoyed tremendously. Other respondents stated that they believed in living life to the fullest and wanted to participate in as many adventure holidays as possible before they became too frail, or their health did not permit them to participate anymore. This supported the research by Bierman (2005) who stated that many older people chose to ¡¥seize the moment¡¦ and take holidays that are more challenging and less passive in nature while they were still mobile and fit. Therefore the views that respondents provided were consistent, in that many older people wanted to maintain a positive outlook to life and live each day to the fullest instead of worrying about issues regarding their own mortality.Being physically challenged and enjoying the adventure experienceAll respondents stated that the enjoyment and satisfaction that they derived from paid work was very different from what they derived from adventure tours. The difference lay in the fact that no matter how enjoyable work was, there were still challenges, stresses and expectations to meet in their paid work, whereas adventure tours did not present the same types of problems. At times they had to push themselves physically and mentally on the adven- ture tour; however, they considered that this was a part of the overall enjoyment.   All the respondents stated that they were now busier than ever before and were never bored in their daily lives. During a typical day many indicated that they were never bored because there were so many activities for them to do. This was because the respondents had active social lives and chose to live each moment to the fullest, whether it was visiting friends, gardening, doing household chores or going away on holidays.   Swarbrooke et al. (2003) concluded that the feelings derived from taking part in an adventure activity were not unlike the feelings of achievement and self-esteem gained when working, and this type of continuity was both satis- fying and comforting. However, respondents clearly indicated that the enjoyment derived from an adventure tour was far greater than the enjoy- ment derived from work, simply because there were no external expectations or pressures on them when they went on this type of holiday. While respon- dents freely admitted that they had enjoyed their paid work, they did not miss the stressful aspects of their jobs where they had to deal with demand- ing people and/or to meet constant deadlines. Therefore the respondents did not view adventure tours as a continuation of their working life, and this was not a significant motivation for their participation in adventure tours. All respondents indicated that when comparing the two types of enjoyment, it
was equivalent to comparing ¡¥chalk and cheese¡¦ and the feelings derived from one could not possibly be substituted for the other.Meeting new friends and social supportOlder people who travelled in order to meet and make new friends were typi- cal of only a small number of respondents. This was because many respondents did not feel that their circle of friends had diminished since retirement, as most had still maintained a good mix of friends from inside and outside their work environment. In fact, several respondents found that their circle of friends had increased since retirement through involvement in volunteer work and membership of various clubs such as Mind Ventures and National Seniors.   However, several indicated that they had successfully developed new friendships during the adventure tour and had remained firm friends, even participating in other adventure tours with these people. The respondents attributed this to the fact that many of the people who went on adventure tours were like-minded people who shared similar passions for adventure, and therefore it was easier to forge friendships and to maintain them. However, others did not choose to follow up on their new friendships and allowed those friendships to wane. Esther, a 56-year-old, stated, ¡¥When you are in this big adventure together everyone is very close and you call all your friends everyday when you return. But those phone calls soon become an every-other-day thing, then weekly and fortnightly and soon it will just be a card at Christmas time¡¦. Therefore, while the respondents enjoyed meeting new people and forging new friendships, this was not a major factor in their decision to participate. Janice, 62 years old, put it aptly: ¡¥I¡¦m not there to make friends, I¡¦m there because this is what I want to do¡¦. Therefore, none of the respondents stated that they went on adventure tours for the sole purpose of making friends; it was just seen as another aspect of the trip experience that they enjoyed.   All respondents reported that they shared photographs and talked to their family and friends about their adventure experiences. However, this was not a high priority and they only did this because it was a natural thing to want to share photographs of their trip with their significant others. Some of the respondents stated that they did not share their experiences with friends unless they specifically asked to, because they did not want to bore their friends especially if they were not interested in travel.   Most of the respondents reported that their circle of friends had remained the same or had increased during their retirement. This was because throughout their working lives they had managed to keep a good mix of friends from both their work and external to it. Many had kept up friend-
ships with their ex-colleagues either through regular outings or by telephone calls or email. New friends were established through membership of clubs, or by meeting other enthusiasts who shared similar interests.To re-live their youthReminiscing about the past when older people were more active and partici- pated in a wide range of physical activities was not found to be a significant factor in influencing respondents to participate in adventure tourism was suggested by Synder (1991) and Coleman (1995). All respondents felt younger than their chronological age, with some stating that mentally they felt like they were still in their twenties. Others thought that their energy levels had decreased, and were more accepting of this as part of the ageing process and fully embraced it. Barney, a 74-year-old, stated, ¡¥I certainly don¡¦t miss being young, I think being young is an imposition because you don¡¦t make very good decisions and you do things that you end up regretting later on.¡¦ Most respondents were happy with the way that they had aged and indicated that they were now more healthy and active than many others who were in a simi- lar age group to themselves.   However, many indicated that they tired more easily than when they were younger, and several stated that they missed the times when they could do physical activity without feeling the physical effects of aches and pains the next day. On the other hand, there were two respondents who felt that they were in better shape and more energy than they had been ten years ago.Change the negative stereotypes of older peopleAll respondents were not concerned about society¡¦s negative stereotypes about older people as being old, frail and incapable of doing physical activ- ity. Many felt that they did not need to prove themselves, as most of their friends and associates had positive images of older people. However, one respondent felt proud that she was breaking down stereotypes of older people through her active lifestyle, and regarded herself as fitter than many people who were half her age. Another respondent stated that she recently had taken up rock ¡¦n¡¦ roll dancing with her husband to show her friends that although she was getting older, she was still very active and enjoyed life.   Although most of the respondents were aware of society¡¦s negative stereo- types relating to older people being constantly referred to as being frail or useless, slower and less capable, they were not overly concerned about this, because their circle of friends were older people who were like-minded about continuing to stay active in their older years. None of the respondents had personally come across a situation where they felt that they had been nega-
tively stereotyped or discriminated against because of their age. However, several respondents were resentful of this general stereotype, with one respondent taking exception to being seen as ¡¥invisible¡¦ by younger people. Other respondents stated that they preferred to stay positive and not let it interfere with how they lived their lives, because they did not feel they needed to prove anything to anyone. As a result, this need to prove some- thing to others was not a common motive that was stated by respondents to participate in adventure tours.Extrinsic motivations for adventure travelThe two major themes that emerged from the data were the need to remain healthy and to have the money to afford to go on adventure trips.Perceived health statusAll respondents were aware of the benefits of staying physically and mentally active and strove to do so during their lives. The majority of respondents reported that they were in good health and many undertook regular exercise such as daily walks, trips to the gym, and carefully watching their diet. Several respondents indicated that they did not undertake organised exercise programs but did other activities to stay active such as gardening, general housework and walking the dog. All respondents disliked watching television as they consid- ered it as a passive activity and generally only watched the evening news. Two of the respondents had major illnesses such as cancer and a stroke in the past five years but had completely recovered from these illnesses.Financial ability to travelAlthough most of the respondents had paid off their house mortgage and did not have anyone dependent on them for financial support, they were still not as well off as expected. Several depended on their investments, superannua- tion or pension, or worked either full- or part-time to support themselves. Therefore, the cost of the holiday travel was a major consideration in regard to what type of trip to take, and respondents stated that adventure tours tended to be more economical than other types of tours.Research Question 2Intrinsic versus extrinsic motivesIntrinsic factors played a more significant role than extrinsic factors in influ- encing older people to participate in adventure tourism. For the majority of respondents, the cost of a holiday factored heavily on the type of holiday they chose in the future as they were either living on their own superannuation,
working to support themselves, or on a government pension. The respon- dents were not as financially well off as suggested by Golik (1999), Muller (1997) and Patterson (2002), even though most had paid off their mortgage and did not have dependants living at home. Many of the respondents admit- ted that adventure type holidays were more economical than other types of tours and fitted in better with their budgets. However, they also added that the relatively lower cost of adventure type holidays merely gave them the freedom to participate more frequently, which they enjoyed doing and was a side benefit rather than as a critical factor in their decision. Most respondents indicated that if adventure tours ever became too expensive for their budget, they would simply save for longer and take fewer trips, than give it up alto- gether or go on other types of holidays. As Linda, a 58-year-old, stated, ¡¥I see it as more of a case of perceived value for money rather than just value for money and this is something I enjoy very much and don¡¦t mind spending my money on¡¦. In the case of Linda and other respondents, adventure holidays were the only type of holiday that they truly gained real enjoyment from, and would spend money on even if they were not really able to afford it.   Extrinsic motives such as health were less important than the cost of the trip in the choice of an adventure holiday by older people. All but two of the respondents considered they were fit, active and healthy, regularly exercised in the gym, and ate healthy foods to maintain an overall sense of wellness. Many respondents disliked watching television as it was seen as a passive leisure activity, while others preferred to read or do crossword puzzles to keep their minds active. Many indicated that they were suffering from arthritis when they chose to go on their trips, and one respondent even went camping in her wheelchair so she would not miss out. The consensus among respondents was that they would still have chosen an adventure tour even if their level of mobil- ity declined in the future. Many respondents took photographs on their adventure tours and shared them with friends and family. However, this was not a priority and was a clear indication that the respondents did not partici- pate for the purpose of boasting about their adventures to friends and family. Therefore, it can be concluded that extrinsic factors did not play a major role in influencing older people to participate in adventure tours, and that intrin- sic factors were more important motives in their decision to participate.Research Question 3Repeat adventure tourism tripsAll respondents indicated that they wanted to go on further adventure tours in the next 12 months, with most having already made advance bookings. This was due to the fact that they enjoyed these tours so much that they
wanted to continue participating for as long as possible. Rita (aged 80 years), the oldest respondent, put it aptly, ¡¥I¡¦ll only go for those bus tours when I can¡¦t walk on my own or need someone to push me around in my wheelchair but for now I¡¦ll do the more adventurous things¡¦. Another respondent, Maria, stated that, ¡¥When I was doing the activities that I did on tour such as hiking up rough terrain, all of my focus, energy and concentration went into completing the activ- ity successfully and other thoughts did not enter my mind¡¦. This could be related to one of the ¡¥concentration¡¦ dimensions of flow as discussed by Csikszentmihalyi (1990) and Jackson (2000). These feelings were extremely enjoyable for Maria and were the main reason why she wanted to keep partic- ipating in adventure tours until she physically could not continue any more.Research Question 4Providing for the needs of older adventure tourists?None of the respondents had participated in tours that were specifically targeting older people, and most were satisfied with the level of service that the adventure tour companies offered them. However, Madeline, a 56-year- old, noted that the lowlight of her tour was the lack of emphasis on safety by her tour guide whom she felt was running a ¡¥one-man-show¡¦ and almost fatally injured himself due to his own negligence. This could have left their group stranded in the middle of the Kimberley Ranges with no emergency backup plan. All respondents were very concerned about safety aspects and emphasised the need for tour companies to take the necessary safety precau- tions such as pre-tour training, and employing at least two guides on each tour in case something happened to one. This was supported by Hall and McArthur (1991) who stated that participants on commercial whitewater rafting trips in particular placed a high priority on safety considerations, and especially the competence of their guides.   Several respondents also expressed a preference for the need to provide healthy food options and to cater for the special dietary needs of older people. They stressed that it was vital that tour companies recognise that older people had physical limitations and to cater to them by reducing the distance trav- elled each day, in comparison to tours for younger travellers only.Implications for commercial providers of adventure tourismThere are several implications for commercial providers of adventure tours:1. While cost is not a motivating factor for older people to participate, it remains an issue in regard to the number of trips that older people are able to take annually. Most preferred to take at least two trips a
year depending on the cost of the tour and as a result, it is logical that commercial providers attempt to keep their prices competitive if they want any repeat business from older people.2. Generally, older adults prefer to participate in adventure tours even if they are not mobile or fit, and they supported the need to place greater emphasis on ensuring that safety precautions are met, and would like tour operators to conform to the highest standards that are possible.3. Providing healthy food options as well as taking into consideration special dietary needs of participants was also welcomed by older people which was important in showing that the provider is making an effort to understand the specific dietary needs of older people.4. Older people would like to be able to enjoy a range of different experiences and landscapes on each tour. Therefore, commercial providers should provide a variety of tours to different regions that are offering a range of experiences. Many older people stated that they would like to go to places that were ¡¥off the beaten track¡¦, where few people have ventured before, and commercial providers should keep this in mind when planning future tours.5. Many older people have physical limitations and may not be able to travel long distances in comparison to younger people. Commercial providers should carefully plan for the physical limitations of older people when they plan the schedule of adventure tours, and not to openly discuss older people¡¦s personal limitations and disabilities in front of all people on the tour. However it is important that tour providers be aware of the physical limitations of participants and to always brief participants about any contingency plans if problems occur during the tour.6. Commercial providers should provide adventure tours so that older people of average fitness can participate, rather than to provide special tours for only older people. This is because older people prefer to interact with people of all ages.ConclusionThe world¡¦s population is ageing, and older people have a greater propensity to travel because they are wealthier and healthier than previous cohorts of older people. Results from the qualitative interviews of a small sample of older adults who were aged 50 years or older, found that the most significant motive for adventure travel was the need to escape from everyday routine by interjecting it with elements of adventure and nature. However, all respon-
dents were adamant that boredom was not a large part of their daily lives. The experience of seeing different landscapes, wildlife and native plants as well as going to places where few people had ventured previously were important motivations for older adults to go on adventure tours. Many respondents stated that they loved the thrill of the adventure itself, because they had an adventurous spirit and enjoyed the adrenaline rush. Many respondents wanted to see as much as possible before they became too old and frail to do so, and believed in living every moment to the fullest.   However, other reasons stated in the research literature ¡X the need to make new friends as their social circle had diminished after retirement; remi- niscing about their youth; to ease the transition into retirement; the urge to take a positive view about ageing and the changing of negative attitudes and stereotypes about ageing ¡X were not supported in this research as major factors in the respondent¡¦s decision to participate in adventure tourism. In terms of the extrinsic factors to participate, none of the respondents went on tours simply because they were in good health and this was not a major consideration, as many suffered from arthritis and other mpairments. The cost of the holiday was a much bigger concern than their health because many of the respondents were on a pension or living off their superannua- tion savings. However, many respondents stated that the cheaper cost of adventure holiday tours compared to other forms of travel was a bonus and most participated because they gained real enjoyment from the adventure experience. Because of the relatively cheaper cost of adventure tours, this allowed them to take more than one trip per year. Respondents also indicated that if adventure tours became too expensive in the future, they would simply reduce their participation, rather than give them up completely.   Adventure tour providers need to keep their prices competitive so that older people are able to afford regular trips. Tour providers should place stronger emphasis on safety, and provide experienced guides because safety is a major concern for older people when deciding which tour company they preferred to travel with. Physical limitations of older people must also be taken into consideration, especially the understanding that older people should not be expected to do the same amount of physical exercise as younger people while on the same trip. Shorter day trips of lesser intensity than younger tourists should be provided for older adults. Furthermore, tour providers should not openly discuss the physical limitations of older people on the tour, especially in front of younger people.   Each tour should also have a good mix of younger and older people because older people enjoy the company of younger people. Finally, older people want to see as many things as possible and tour providers need to
provide a wide variety of special interest tours to different locations so that older people are encouraged to take further tours with the same company in the future.ReferencesAtchley, R. C. (1999). Continuity and adaptation in ageing. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.Australian Bureau of Statistics. (1999). Older people: Australia, a social report. (Catalogue No. 4109.0). Canberra, ACT: AGPS.Bentley, T. A., & Page, S. J. (2001). Scoping the extent of adventure tourism accidents.Annals of Tourism Research, 28, 705¡V726.Bierman, F. (2005). For some, and adventuring never gets old. The New York Times, 27 February, 5.3.Brooks, A. (1994). Deals for older people if they will just ask. New York: New York Times.Cleaver, M., & Muller, T. E. (2002). The socially aware baby boomer: Gaining a lifestyle based understanding of the new wave of ecotourists. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 10, 173¡V190.Cleaver, M., Muller, T., Ruys, H., & Wei, S. (1999). Tourism product development for the senior market based on travel-motive research. Tourism Recreation Research, 24, 5¡V12.Coleman, P. G. (1995). Facing the challenges of aging: Development, coping and meaning in life. Handbook of communication and aging research. J. Coupland. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Csikzentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York: Harper Perrenial.Deci, E. L. (1975). Intrinsic motivation. New York: Plenum.Ewert, A., & Jamieson, L. (2003). Current status and future directions in the adven- ture tourism industry. In J. Wilks & S. Page (Eds.), Managing tourist health and safety in the new millennium (pp. 67¡V83). Boston, MA: Pergamon.Firestone, R. F., Firestone, L. A., & Cartlett, J. (2003). Creating a life of meaning and compassion: The wisdom of psychotherapy. Washington DC: American Psychological Association.Fluker, M. R., & Turner, L. W. (2000). Needs, motivations and expectations of a commercial whitewater rafting experience. Journal of Travel Research, 38(4), 389¡V389.Golik, B. (1999). Not over the hill. Just enjoying the view: A close-up look at the seniors market for tourism in Australia. Brisbane: Dept. of Families, Youth and Community Care.Gratton, C., & Jones, I. (2004). Research methods for sport studies. London: Routledge.
Hall, C. M., & McArthur, S. (1991). Commercial white water rafting in Australia: Motivations and expectations of the participant and the relevance of group size for the rafting experience. Leisure Options: Australian Journal of Leisure and Recreation, 1(4), 25¡V31.Henderson, K., & Bialeschki, D. (2002). Evaluation of leisure services: Making enlight- ened decisions. State College, PA: Venture Publishing.Hepworth, M. (2004). Images of old age. In J. Coupland (Ed.), Handbook of commu- nication and aging research. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Hill, B. J. (1995). A guide to adventure travel. Parks and Recreation, 30(9), September, 56¡V65.Hinch, T., & J. Higham (2004). Sport tourism development. In D. Timothy (Ed.),Aspects of tourism. Clevedon, UK: Channel View.Hudson, S. (2003). Sport and adventure tourism. New York: Haworth Hospitality Press. Iso-Ahola, S. (1989). Motivation for leisure. In E. L. Jackson & T. L. Burton (Eds.), Understanding leisure and recreation: Mapping the past, charting the future (pp.247¡V280). State College, PA: Venture.Jackson, S. A. (2000). Joy, fun and flow state in sport. In Y. A. Hanin (Ed.), Emotions in sport. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.Javalgi, R. G., Thomas, E. G., & Rao, S. R. (1992). Consumer behavior in the US travel marketplace: An analysis of senior and non-senior travellers. Journal of Travel Research, 31, 14¡V19.Kim, Y., Weaver, P., & McCleary, K. (1996). A structural equation model: The rela- tionship between travel motivation and information sources in the senior travel market. Journal of Vacation Marketing, 3, 55¡V64.Lipscombe, N. (1995) Appropriate adventure: Participation for the aged. Australian Parks and Leisure, 31, 41¡V45.Maddux, J. E. (1997). Habit, health, happiness. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 19, 331¡V346.McClelland, D. C., Atkinson, J. W., Clark, R. W., & Lowell, E. L. (1953). The achieve- ment motive. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.Markides, K. S., & Boldt, J. S. (1983). A structural modelling approach to the meas- urement and meaning of cognitive age. Journal of Consumer Research, 19, 292¡V301.Miles M. B., & Huberman, M. (2002). The qualitative researcher¡¦s companion.Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage PublicationsMiller, A. J. (2003). Travel: Older vacationers pursue exciting itineraries, hiking, biking, riding, visiting unusual places become options so many. The Atlantic Journal ¡X Constitution. Atlanta, GA. September 24, p. S.2.Millington, K., Locke, T., & Locke, A. (2001). Occasional studies: Adventure travel.Travel and Tourist Analyst, 4, 65¡V97.
Muller, T. E. (1997). The benevolent society: Value and lifestyle changes among middle-aged baby boomers. In L. Chiagouris (Ed.), Values, lifestyles and psycho- graphics (pp. 299¡V316). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Naida, N., Shaw, C. and Cook, D. (1997). The adventure travel report 1997.Washington D.C.: Travel Industry Association of America.Patterson, I. (2002). Baby boomers and adventure tourism: The importance of marketing the leisure experience. World Leisure Journal, 44, 4¡V10.Pizam, A., Neumann, Y., & Reichel, A. (1979). Tourist satisfaction: Uses and misuses.Annals of Tourism Research, 6, 195¡V197.Ruys, H., & Wei, S. (1995). Accommodation needs of mature Australian travellers.Australian Journal of Hospitality Management, 5, 51¡V58.Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development and well-being. American Psychologist, 55, 68¡V78.Satariano, W. A. (1997). Editorial: The disabilities of aging ¡X looking to the physical environment. American Journal of Public Health, 87, 331¡V332.Sherman, E., & Cooper, P. (1988). Life satisfaction: The missing focus of marketing to seniors. Journal of Health Care Marketing, 8, 69¡V71.Smith, C., & Jenner, P. (1997). The seniors travel market. Travel and Tourism Analyst, 5, 43¡V62.Sonmez, S. F., & Graefe, A. R. (1998). Determining future travel behavior from past leisure experience and perceptions of risk and safety. Journal of Travel Research, 37, 171¡V177.Sung, H. H. (2004). Classification of adventure travellers: Behaviour, decision- making, and target markets. Journal of Travel research, 42, 343¡V356.Swarbrooke, J., Beard, C., Leckie, S., & Pomfret, G. (2003). Adventure tourism: The new frontier. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann.United Nations, Division for Social Policy and Development, Department of Economic and Social Affairs. (2000). The sex and age distribution of the world popu- lations: 1998 revision. Available at: http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/ ageing/Graph.pdfVeal, A. (2006). Research methods for leisure and tourism: A practical guide. London: Pearson Education Ltd.Vukonic, B. (1996). Tourism and religion. Oxford: Pergamon.Weiler, B., & Hall, C. (1992). Special interest tourism. London: Bellhaven.World Tourism Organisation. (2001). Tourism 2020 vision: Global forecasts and profiles of market segments, 7. Madrid: World Tourism Organization.