TRAVEL MOTIVES OF ADVENTURE TOURISTS: A CASE STUDY OF MAGOEBASKLOOF ADVENTURESH. TERBLANCHE B.A. (Hons) 20306458Thesis submitted for the degree Masters in Tourism Management at the Potchefstroom Campus of the North-West UniversitySupervisor: Prof Dr. P van der MerweMei 2012
Travel motives of adventure tourists: A case study of Magoebaskloof AdventureH. TERBLANCHE HONOURS B.A.Supervisor: Prof.Dr. P. van der Merwe2011Potchefstroom
Financial assistance from the North-West University (Potchefstroom campus) and the National Research Foundation is acknowledged. Statements and suggestions in this dissertation are those of the author and should not be regarded as those of the North-West University, Potchefstroom campus.AcknowledgementsMy grateful thanks to the following:* Our Heavenly Father for giving me the strength, persistence and power to complete my studies.* Prof. Doctor Peet van der Merwe my supervisor and mentor. Without his support and guidance it wouldnot have come this far. Thank you for your support.* The Tourism programme at the North West University Potchefstroom Campus for all the help with finding information.* My mother and father for always being there supporting and encouraging me along the way.* Annatjie Woodrow for the emotional support and prayers.* All my friends that supported and encouraged me throughout my studies.* Dr.WilmaBreytenbach for her assistance with the statistical analysis.* Malcolm Ellis for the grammar editing of this thesis.* Prof Casper Lessing for the assistance with the bibliography.* Dr. Amanda van der Merwe for translating the summary in Afrikaans.* Magoebaskloof Adventures for their assistance and support with the survey.
AbstractTRAVEL MOTIVES OF ADVENTURE TOURISTS: A CASE STUDY OF MAGOEBASKLOOF ADVENTURESAdventure tourism involves travel and leisure activities pursued with the expectation that they will produce a rewarding, adventurous experience. Adventure tourism can be defined as travel to a destination to participate in adventurous activities in a natural environment. Two categories of adventure are distinguished, namely soft and hard adventure. Soft adventure includes activities such as bird-watching, hiking, camping and horseback riding, and it requires relatively little physical skill and little or no experience. Hard adventure includes activities such as rock climbing, mountaineering, survival games and caving. Hard adventure has high levels of risk and participants are more likely to engage in physically and mentally challenging outdoor activities.Magoebaskloof Adventures is one of many adventure destinations in South Africa where adventure tourists can participate in adventure activities. It is of great value for Magoebaskloof Adventures to ensure that the needs and expectations of adventure tourists are fulfilled. One way to ensure that these needs are met, is to determine what motivates adventure tourists to travel and participate in adventure activities. Knowledge of these motives will assist adventure tourism products to stay competitive and to develop relevant products.A number of researchers have found that certain travel motives can explain the existence of certain adventure tourism products. Motive can also influence or determine the behaviour of adventure tourists visiting different adventure products or destinations.   Past research into adventure motives identified important motives such as escape, challenge, fun, social interaction and experience. As little research has been conducted on travel motives for adventure tourism in South Africa, the aim of this research was to determine the travel motives of adventure tourists to Magoebaskloof Adventures.
A literature study provided the background for the empirical study. A quantitative research approach was followed, with a non-probability sampling method, namely convenience sampling.    The research was conducted at Magoebaskloof Adventures for a period of nine months (March 2010 to December 2010). A total of 400 usable questionnaires were received back.The results of the study involved two sections: firstly the profile of the typical adventure tourist was determined; and secondly the travel motives of adventure tourists were determined. The profile indicated that adventure tourists are on average 33 years old, male and English-speaking. They are married, hold a diploma or degree and travel in groups of 1-5. The typical adventure tourist travels 1-3 times a year, drives a sedan vehicle and prefers self-catering accommodation.The factor analysis identified the following seven travel motives for adventure tourists: Factor 1 ¡V Prestige and status(an increased sense of personal growth, acquiring new skills, the feeling of success after completing the activity, overcoming fear, and interacting with people and/or the environment); Factor 2 ¡VGroup togetherness(participation in a recreational opportunity, family recreation, spending time with someone special, experiencing fun and excitement, and spending time with friends); Factor 3 ¡VKnowledge seeking(learning about adventure, sharing in the challenge, and educating oneself); Factor 4 ¡VEscape and relaxation(exploring a new destination, getting away from routine, and relaxing); Factor 5¡VPhotography and attraction(an opportunity to practice photography, continuing a habit of adventure that already started in childhood, and the desire to feel part of an adventure); Factor 6 ¡V Enhancing relations (participating because friends arranged the activity, participating in order to tell friends about the experience, and participating because the participant has the necessary experience to perform the activity); and Factor 7 ¡V Novelty(performing the activity before the participant is too old, enjoying the journey with family and friends, and doing ¡¥something different¡¦).Escape and relaxation was the factor with the highest mean value, and this correlates with other adventure travel motive research as well as research regarding tourists¡¦ motives for visiting nature-based attractions. An analysis of travel motives in
general indicates that Escape and relaxation is commonly an important travel motive. Magoebaskloof Adventure focuses more on soft adventure, and the travel motives of participants in this research will therefore differ from those of consumers of hard adventure products. The latter are motivated by aspects such as thrill, challenge, fear, terror, risk, daring, adrenaline, journey, expedition, excitement and success, to name a few. Group togetherness was also identified as a strong motivating factor, and existing nature-based research confirms this as an important motive to travel.In conclusion, this study found that there are differences between the travel motives of tourists to Magoebaskloof Adventures ¡V which provides soft adventure tourism products ¡V and the travel motives of tourists who pursue hard adventure activities. The results of this research can assist Magoebaskloof Adventures in the development of feature adventure tourism products and focused marketing material.Keywords: Adventure, Travel motives, Magoebaskloof Adventures, Nature tourism, Soft adventure activities, Hard adventure activities.
UittrekselREISMOTIEWE VAN AVONTUUR TOERISTE: ¡¥N GEVALLE STUDIE VAN MAGOEBASKLOOFAvontuurtoerisme behels reis- en ontspanningsaktiwiteite wat beoefen word met die verwagting dat dit ? bevredigende, avontuurlike ervaring sal bied. Avontuurtoerisme kan beskryf word as dat daar gereis word na ? bestemming om deel te neem aan avontuuraktiwiteite in ? natuurlike omgewing. Twee kategorie? avontuur word onderskei, naamlik sagte- en harde-avontuur. Sagte-avontuur sluit aktiwiteite in soos vo?lkyk, stap, kampeer en perdry, en dit vereis relatief min fisiese vaardighede en geen of min ervaring. Harde-avontuur sluit aktiwiteite in soos rotsklim, bergklim, oorlogspeletjies     en     grotverkenning.	Harde-avontuur gaan met ho? risikovlakkegepaard en deelnemers is dikwels betrokke in fisies en geestelik uitdagende buitemuurse aktiwiteite.Magoebaskloof Adventures is een van vele avontuurbestemmings in Suid-Afrika waar avontuurtoeriste aan avontuuraktiwiteite kan deelneem. Dit is baie belangrik vir Magoebaskloof Adventures om te sorg dat die behoeftes en verwagtinge van avontuurtoeriste bevredig word. Een manier om te verseker dat hierdie behoeftes bevredig word, is om te bepaal wat avontuurtoeriste motiveer om te reis na en deel te neem aan avontuuraktiwiteite. Kennis van hierdie motiewe sal avontuurtoerisme- produkte help om kompeterend te bly en om toepaslike produkte te ontwikkel.Verskeie navorsers het bevind dat reismotivering die verklaring kan wees vir die bestaan van sekere avontuurtoerismeprodukte. Die gedrag van avontuurtoeriste wat verskillende avontuurprodukte of ¡Vbestemmings besoek, kan ook deur motivering be?nvloed of bepaal word. Bestaande navorsing oor avontuurmotivering het belangrike motiewe ge?dentifiseer, soos ontvlugting, uitdaging, pret, sosiale interaksie en ervaring. Omdat daar nog min navorsing gedoen is oor reismotivering ten opsigte van avontuurtoerisme in Suid-Afrika, was die doel van hierdie navorsing om die reismotiewe van avontuurtoeriste na Magoebaskloof Adventures te bepaal.
? Literatuurstudie het die agtergrond vir die empiriese studie gevorm. ? Kwantitatiewe navorsingsbenadering is gevolg, met ? nie-waarskynlikheidsteekproef- metode, naamlik ? gerieflikheidsteekproefneming. Die navorsing is vir ? periode van nege maande by Magoebaskloof Adventures gedoen (Maart 2010 tot Desember 2010). ? Totaal van 400 bruikbare vraelyste is terugontvang.Die resultate van die studie het twee afdelings behels: eerstens is die profiel van avontuurtoeriste bepaal en tweedens is die reismotiewe van avontuurtoeriste bepaal. Hieruit het geblyk dat avontuurtoeriste gemiddeld 33 jaar oud, manlik en Engelssprekend is. Hierdie toeriste is gewoonlik getroud, het ? diploma of ? graad behaal en reis in groepe van 1-5. Hulle reis 1-3 keer per jaar, bestuur ? sedan en verkies selfsorgakkommodasie.Die faktoranalise het die volgende sewe reismotiewe vir avontuurtoeriste ge?dentifiseer: Faktor 1 ¡V Prestige en status (? verhoogde sin van persoonlike groei, die aanleer van nuwe vaardighede, die gevoel van sukses na afhandeling van die aktiwiteit, die oorwinning van vrees, en interaksie met mense en/of die omgewing); Faktor 2 ¡V Groepsamehorigheid (deelname aan ? ontspanningsgeleentheid, gesinsontspanning, om tyd saam met iemand spesiaal deur te bring, om pret en opwinding te ervaar, en om tyd met vriende deur te bring); Faktor 3 ¡V Soeke na kennis (leer meer omtrent avontuur, deel in die uitdaging, en verbreed ? mens se opvoeding); Faktor 4 ¡V Ontvlugting en ontspanning (verken ? nuwe bestemming, breek weg van roetine, en ontspan); Faktor 5 ¡V Fotografie en aanloklikheid (om fotografie te beoefen, om ? tradisie van avontuur voort te sit wat reeds in die grootwordjare begin het, en om deel van ? avontuur te voel); Faktor 6 ¡V Versterking van verhoudings (deelname omdat vriende die aktiwiteit gere?l het, deelname om vriende te vertel van die ervaring, en deelname omdat die deelnemer oor die nodige ervaring beskik om die aktiwiteit te beoefen); en Faktor 7 ¡VNuutheid (om die aktiwiteit te beoefen voordat die deelnemer te oud is daarvoor, om die reis saam met familie en vriende te geniet, en om ¡¥iets anders¡¦ te doen).Ontvlugting en ontspanning was die faktor met die hoogste gemiddelde waarde, en dit korreleer met ander bevindinge in die literatuur oor motiverings vir avontuurreis,
sowel as met navorsing oor die motiverings van toeriste om natuurgebaseerde attraksies te besoek. ? Analise van reismotiewe in die algemeen toon dat ontvlugting en ontspanning deurgaans ? belangrike motivering vir reis is. Magoebaskloof Adventures fokus meer op sagte-avontuur, en die reismotiewe van deelnemers aan hierdie navorsing sal daarom verskil van die motiewe van verbruikers van harde- avontuurprodukte. Laasgenoemde word gemotiveer deur aspekte soos prikkeling, uitdaging, angs, vreesaanjaendheid, risiko, waaghalsigheid, adrenalien, ¡¦n tog onderneem, ekspedisie, opwinding en sukses, om enkeles te noem. Groepsamehorigheid is ook ge?dentifiseer as ? sterk motiverende faktor, en bestaande natuurgebaseerde navorsing bevestig dit as ? belangrike motivering om te reis.Hierdie studie het tot die gevolgtrekking gekom dat daar verskille is tussen die reismotiewe van toeriste na Magoebaskloof Adventures ¡V wat sagte- avontuurprodukte aanbied ¡V en die reismotiewe van toeriste wat harde- avontuuraktiwiteite beoefen. Die resultate van hierdie navorsing kan Magoebaskloof Adventures help om sekere kenmerkende avontuurtoerismeprodukte en gefokusde bemarkingsmateriaal te ontwikkel.Sleutelwoorde: Avontuur, Reismotiewe, Magoebaskloof Adventures, Natuurtoerisme, Sagte-avontuuraktiwiteite, Harde-avontuuraktiwiteite.
                        Table of Contents Chapter 1: Introduction and Problem Statement
1.1 Introduction	11.2 Problem statement	21.3 Primary and secondary objectives of the study	81.3.1 Primary objective	81.3.2 Secondary objectives	81.4 Method of research	91.4.1 Literature study	91.4.2 Empiric survey	91.4.2.1 Research design and method of collecting data	91.4.2.2 Selection of the sampling frame	101.4.2.3 Sampling method	101.4.2.4 Development of questionnaire	111.4.2.5 Data analysis	121.5 Defining the concepts	131.5.1 Adventure tourism	131.5.2 Travel motives	141.5.3 Magoebaskloof Adventures	141.5.4 Nature tourism	151.6 Preliminary chapter classification	15Chapter 2: A Theoretical Analysis of Adventure Tourism2.1 Introduction	182.2 The history of adventure tourism	192.3 What is adventure tourism?	252.3.1 Adventure	252.3.1.1 Soft and hard adventure	272.3.2 Adventure tourism	282.3.2.1 Forms of adventure travelling	302.3.3 Adventure tourist	322.3.3.1 Adventure tourist, lifestyle, ages, groups and adventure	332.3.3.2 The motivation of adventure tourists	362.3.4 Adventure tourism activities	362.4 Adventure travel market	402.4.1 Adventure market segmentation overview	412.4.1.1 Adventure tourism markets	422.5 Conclusion	44Chapter 3:	A Literature Analysis of Tourist Behaviour and Travel Motives3.1 Introduction	463.2 Tourist Behaviour	473.3 Theories	633.3.1 Maslow¡¦s Hierarchy of Needs model	653.3.2 Iso-Ahola motivation model	683.3.3 The Push and Pull theory	703.3.4 Plog¡¦s Allocentrism/Psychocentrism model	713.3.5 Sunlust Theory	713.3.6 Herzberg two factor theory of motivation	723.4 Previous research regarding travel motives of adventure tourists .73 3.5	Conclusion	77Chapter 4: Empirical Results4.1.	Introduction	79Section A4.2 Demographic Results	794.2.1 Home language	804.2.2 Age	804.2.3 Gender	814.2.4 Marital Status	824.2.5 Country of residence	824.2.6 Province of residence	834.2.7 Highest level of education	844.2.8 Group size	844.2.9 Mode of transport used by participants	854.2.10 Number of time participated in adventure activities	864.2.11 Importance of activities	864.2.12 Dining preferences	884.2.13 Media	894.2.13.1 Magazines	894.2.13.2 News Papers	894.2.13.3 TV-Programs	894.2.13.4 Radio station	894.2.14 Came to hear about the resort	90Section B4.3 Travel motives (Factor Analyses)	914.4 Conclusion	96Chapter 5: Conclusion and Recommendations5.1 Introduction	975.2 Conclusions regarding research	985.2.1 Conclusions regarding the literature analysis of adventureTourism	985.2.2 Conclusions regarding the literature analysis of touristbehaviour and travel motives	1025.2.3 Conclusions regarding the empirical research	1055.3 Recommendations with regard to travel motivations ofadventure tourists	1085.3.1 Recommendations regarding the travel motives of adventuretourists	1085.3.2 Recommendations with regard to future research	1085.3.3 Limitations of this study	109
List of figuresFigure 1.1   An overview of tourism	3Figure 2.1   Definition of adventure	26Figure 2.2   Summary of adventure tourism	28Figure 2.3   Adventure tourism: a form of alternative tourism	29Figure 2.4   Characteristics of adventure tourists	34Figure 3.1   Decision making process	49Figure 3.2   Tourist decision making process and influencing factors	52Figure 3.3   Maslow¡¦s Hierarchy of needs	65Figure 3.4   Iso-Ahola motivation model	68Figure 3.5   Push & Pull theory	70Figure 3.6   Herzberg¡¦s two factor theory of motivation	72Figure 4.1   Home language	80Figure 4.2   Age groups	81Figure 4.3   Gender	81Figure 4.4   Marital status	82Figure 4.5   Country of residence	83Figure 4.6   Province of residence	83Figure 4.7   Education	84Figure 4.8   Group size	85Figure 4.9   Mode of transport	85Figure 4.10 Amount of adventure activities	86
List of tablesTable 1.1	Soft adventure vs adventure	6Table 1.2	Previous adventure studies	7Table 2.1	Adventure activities	36Table 3.1	Social class	62Table 3.2	Adventure tourists travel motives	75Table 3.3	Previous adventure research	75Table 4.1	Activity importance	87Table 4.2	Dining preferences	89Table 4.3	Advertising	90Table 4.4	Profile of adventure tourist	90Table 4.5	Factor analyses for participation in activities	92Table 5.1	Profile of an adventure tourist	106Table 5.2	Participation in adventure activities	106List of mapsMap 1.1	Location of Magoebaskloof Adventures	15References	110Appendix A Questionnaire
CHAPTER 1INTRODUCTION AND PROBLEM STATEMENT1.1 INTRODUCTIONAdventure tourism has developed from the broader form of traditional outdoor and wilderness recreation, and today forms an integral part of nature based-tourism (Van der Merwe, 2009:220; Sung, Morrison & O¡¦Leary, 1997:1). Adventure tourism is an activity that attracts tourists to a destination because of an adventure activity that is itself presented at the destination, rather than the traditional tourist attractions and sightseeing (Sung et al., 1997:1). Adventure tourism has been part of the human race for a long time. At first, it was not recognised as adventure tourism by the participants as it was a ¡§way of living¡¨ and so not seen as leisure (Van der Merwe, 2009:221). Early adventurers included groups such as pilgrims, traders, seasonal migrates, mercenaries, traders and hunters (Swarbrooke, Bread, Leckie & Pomfret, 2003:40).Today, adventure tourism is based on a wide spectrum of activities, from the less energetic activities (such as snorkelling and hot air ballooning) to thrill-inducing activities for the ultra-fit (bungee jumping, diving with great white sharks, paragliding and white water rafting) (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:5). During the past decade, adventure tourism has grown and expanded into a niche market, chosen by participants for the risk and challenge it encompasses (Bentley & Page, 2008:707). According to Zuckerman (1990:313), adventure tourists are motivated by risk, as risk forms the basis of their motivation when seeking sensation. Zuckerman defines sensation seeking as the need for a variety of novel and complex sensations and experiences where the tourists are willing to take part in physical and social risks for the sake of the experience. Participants have certain expectations of excitement (Fluker & Turner, 2010:381) and these are needs that should be filled by participating in adventure activities.Because participants are willing to take risks and so have an element of uncertainty, and also because ¡¥thrill¡¦ forms a major part of participating in adventure tourism, it can only be presumed that adventure tourists will also have different travel motives
from the more conventional (¡¥normal¡¦) tourists. This is due, in part, to the nature of the activity being seen as the end achievement. The question that thus arises is what motivates and drives adventure tourists to participate in adventure activities?The aim of this chapter is to craft a problem statement, to formulate the primary and secondary objectives of the study, and to discuss the methodology that will be used in the study. The main concepts will be defined and each chapter will be discussed briefly.1.2 PROBLEM STATEMENTAccording to Dowling (1997, as cited by Fluker & Turner, 2000:380), tourism can be divided into two groupings, being mass tourism and alternative tourism. Mass tourism is described as tourism where large numbers of people are seeking replication of their own culture in institutionalised settings with little cultural or environmental interaction from an authentic setting. Alternative tourism, on the other hand, as described by Eadington and Smith (1992, and as cited by Fluker & Turner, 2000:380), offers forms of tourism that are consistent with natural, social, and community values and that allow both hosts and guests to enjoy positive and worthwhile interaction, with shared experiences. Within alternative tourism, certain sub-categories are listed, such as cultural aspects, events and nature-based tourism. Nature-based tourism can be further classified into nature-based and adventure tourism as illustrated in Figure 1.1.Adventure, nature-based and wildlife tourism form sub-categories under the ¡§Natural¡¨ component of alternative tourism, and indicates that all the activities take place in a natural environment. For adventure tourism to take place, three foundational elements are required: freedom of choice, intrinsic rewards and an element of uncertainty (Weber, 2001:361; Fluker & Turner, 2000:380).Ewert (as cited by Weber, 2001:361) states that adventure is deliberately to seek risk and uncertain outcomes, where the principal attraction is an outdoor activity that relies on the natural terrain and, generally, requires specialised gear (Buckley, 2007:1428). In earlier years, adventure tourism was more the exploration ofunknown territories whereas today adventuretourism is pursued for its own sake or
Figure 1.1: An overview of tourism (Newsome, Moore & Dowling, 2002, as cited by Espinoza, 2010:2)as an end in itself, and not as a means to an end (Weber, 2001:363). Mallet (2010:1) states that it is the risk factor in adventure activities that attracts most tourists to participate in adventure activities.   Walle (1997, as cited by Weber, 2001:360) adds that quest for insight and knowledge are aspects that, of themselves, encourage adventure tourism.Adventure tourism¡¦s origins lie within traditional recreation, and include activities that require specific skills in an outdoor setting. The difference between normal recreation tourism and adventure recreation, however, lies in the sense of deliberately seeking risk, as in the case of adventure recreation, as well as in the uncertainty of the outcome (Ewert, 1998, as cited by Weber, 2001:361). If risk is absent, the desire to participate will decrease because risk takes on the central role of satisfaction with the experience. Participants in adventure tourism accept a certain element of risk and danger that, while not fully compromising their safety needs, seek to satisfy higher-level needs through adventurous pursuits. Adventurers also seek risks to match their own skills and competence with the situational risk (Weber, 2001:362).
It can be seen that adventure tourism is not something upon which to venture lightly and that the adventurer must assess his or her skills and competence against the level of risk before taking part in the adventure activity. Further, participants need to be able to trust the guides and equipment. Coupled to this, they must also have weighed the possible losses against the anticipated benefits, such as self-fulfilment and social approval (Bentley & Page, 2008:85). According to Fluker and Turner (2000:381), to reach optimum enjoyment and satisfaction, it is important for the participant to assess the levels of their competence, and then to match them with the appropriate adventure opportunities.Adventure tourism activities can be classified into two broad categories, soft or hard adventure. Soft adventure is one of the fastest growing segments in tourism travel, and is enjoyed by anyone looking for more than just the typical vacation to a beach or sightseeing. These ¡§soft adventure¡¨ activities are normally undertaken to supplement the traditional vacation and could include trips to destinations that offer ecotourism or special interest expeditions or themes (Soft adventure tourism, 2010:1). Soft adventure thus refers to activities that have perceived risks, but offer less physical risk and probably require little or no experience, such as hiking and walking safaris. It offers greater convenience in terms of sleeping arrangements and cuisine. For the alternative traveller, soft adventure offers an expanded range of activities and adventure experiences such as photographic safaris (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:33; Mallet, 2010:1; Allen, 2010:1; Van der Merwe, 2009:230; Mill, 2010:1). Most of the soft adventure activities are supervised and led by experienced guides (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:33). Jenkins (2008:1) summarises soft adventure as:¡§A travel experience that is rewarding for spirit and mind, is safe and without excessive physical demands and goes beyond the typical tourist itinerary¡¨.Hard adventure activities, on the other hand, refers to activities associated with a high level of risk where participants must be physically and mentally fit to participate in these activities (sky-diving, white-water rafting or kayaking, rock climbing, cave exploration, survival games and mountaineering, as examples) (Mill, 2010:1), and where participants thrive when exposed to activities with high levels of risk. Participants are more likely to engage in physically, as well as mentally, challenging outdoor activities that demand a great deal of previous experience and high levels of
competence. Participants receive an adrenaline rush from taking risks even though most of the time they can control the risks because of their experience (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:64). An intense level of commitment is necessary, and weather conditions, sleeping accommodations and diet become of secondary importance. Hard adventure includes an intimate experience with the destination¡¦s environment and culture (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:33; Mallet, 2010:1; Allen, 2010:1; Van der Merwe, 2009:230). Hard adventure is defined as:¡§ ÿ a travel experience that has a higher risk element, requires more physical challenge, is rewarding to the spirit and pushes people to step out of their comfort zone¡¨ (Jenkins, 2008:1).It is understandable that adventure tourism is unique and different from other mass tourism and even other forms of ecotourism that form part of nature-based or wildlife tourism, and therefore will affect the travel motives of participants (Ryngnga, 2008:50; Weber, 2001:361; Fluker & Turner, 2000:380). It is undeniable that ¡¥risk¡¦ and ¡¥fear¡¦ are key motivational aspects for the participants and that seeking ¡¥risk¡¦ and ¡¥fear¡¦ will have an impact on the travel motives of the adventure tourist.Previous research by Fluker and Turner (2000:387) further reveals that participants are often young, educated, affluent, active thrill-seekers who spend significant amounts of money in the pursuit of adventure. Adventure tourists are often demanding and discerning consumers while on holiday, and tend to travel to remote and extreme environments of the world to fulfil their need for emotional highs, risks,challenge, excitement and novelty.Table 1.1 summarises the differences between soft adventure and hard adventure:Adventure tourism has certain core characteristics that aid to motivate tourists to participate. Firstly, the uncertain outcome of the activity sets the scene for challenge Swarbrooke et al., 2003:9). Secondly, the presence of danger creates risk and ensures that the outcome is unpredictable. Danger and risk go hand-in-hand with uncertainty and risk can result in physical harm, pain and even in death, but this are the key motivators for some participants. Thirdly, the activity must be a challenge for participants where participants must have certain abilities and skills, and this will
Table 1.1: Soft adventure vs. hard adventureSoft AdventureHard AdventureCan be enjoyed by anyoneParticipants	must	be	physically	andmentally fitServe	to	supplement	traditionalvacationsPhysically and mentally challengingLess physical riskHigh levels of riskRequires little or no experiencePrevious experience neededHigh Levels of competence requireddetermine the level of challenge (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:10).   Fourth, participants have certain expectations when they participate in adventure activities with certain rewards that are touchable like a trophy or certificate or with other rewards that are intrinsic and self-motivated (everything is new and open to explore and sometimes there is a twist that involves an extension or a development from a previous experience). If there is nothing new to the current experience, then it will not be a new adventure.   Fifthly, participants are exposed to environments and situations that are different from their everyday life. The new environment can lead to stimulating the participants¡¦ senses, emotions and intellect, as well as generating lots of excitement (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:12), Sixthly and finally, adventure includes a number of mental and emotional states that include absorption and contrasting emotions. Adventure also includes periods of intense focus. Most of adventure is an emotional experience as participants invest a certain amount of emotional and mental energy before actively participating in the event (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:14).These factors will therefore influence the marketing strategies used by product owners as well as the product development as what is used in ¡¥normal¡¦ wildlife or nature-based tourism products. One such product that can be found in South Africa is Magoebaskloof Adventures situated in the Limpopo Province. They offer a variety of adventure activities, including canopy tours, quad biking, tubing (or tube-rafting), kloofing (canyoning), paintball, abseiling, fly-fishing, horse riding, 4x4 course, mountainbiking and hiking routes. Therefore the majority of activities provided by Magoebaskloof Adventures can be defined as soft adventure activities. A couple of
hard adventure activities are also provided such as kloofing, abseiling and, in a sense, tubing.One method of assisting product owners such as Magoebaskloof Adventures to better develop marketing strategies and products for adventure tourist is to determine the travel motives of adventure tourists. This will enable them to develop more focussed marketing material that will attract adventure tourists. Knowledge of their motivations will greatly assist in better product development (Fodness, 1994:555; Williams & Soutar, 2009:415).When analysing research conducted about adventure tourism the following studies was found which indicates that there is a gap in the research as none of the research was done specifically with adventure tourism in mind as it forms an integral part of nature-based tourism.Table 1.2: Previous Adventure studiesAdventure tourists on water: linking expectations, affect, achievement and enjoyment to the sports tourismadventureMorgan, Moor & Mansell (2005:73-88)Outdoor adventure tourism:  A review ofresearch approachesWeber ( 2001:360-377)Adventure tourismVan der Merwe (2009:221)Mountaineering	adventure	tourists:	aconceptual framework for researchPomfret (2006:113-123)An exploration   of   motivations   amongscuba divers in north central FloridaMeyer,	Thapa	&	Pennington-Gray(2002:292-295)The main theories of travel motivationBanerjea (2010:1)Van der Merwe (2009:221), argues that tourists have different ideas of adventure and that they have different associations with regard to adventure activities. Some of the key terms identified with adventure tourism include thrill, fear, risk, excitement and challenge. Williams & Soutar (2009:415) conducted a marketing approach to
adventure tourism, and concluded that adventure tourists are young, wealthy, and in search of thrilling experiences. They travel to remote areas to fulfil their need for risk, challenge and excitement. Meyer et al., (2002:292) found in research among scuba divers, that they are motivated by adventure, escape, learning, social interaction, stature and personal challenge. Banerjea (2010:1), researched travel motivation in general and found that tourists travelto escape from daily surroundings, and want to explore the unknown.; Page, Steele & Connell (2006:53), conducted research on adventure tourism promotion in Scotland. They found that risk and relationship is the main motivator to participate in adventure activities. According to Morgan, Moore and Mansell(2005:74), marine tourists seek more active experiences, and take part in dynamic activities that are challenging and include risk. Pomfret (2006:117), focused on mountaineering adventure tourists, and found that push factors such as challenge, risk, creativity and physical setting motivate them to participate in mountaineering.What the above article does not mention is what really motivates the adventure tourist to participate in the activities. What are their goals and what is their psychological state of mind. Page et al. (2006:53) indicate that this is an area of research that is still evolving and therefore needs further attention. Very little, if any, research based on South African circumstances and products was found regarding the travel motives of adventure tourists. Therefore, the problem that this study wishes to address is the determination of the travel motives of adventure tourists to Magoebaskloof Adventures.1.3 PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDYThe primary and secondary objectives of this study are as follows:1.3.1 Primary objectiveThe primary objective of the study is to determine the travel motives of adventure tourists to Magoebaskloof Adventures.1.3.2 Secondary objectivesThe following secondary objectives were set for the study:
Objective oneo To conduct a literature analysis of adventure tourism and activities.Objective twoo To conduct an analysis of tourists¡¦ behaviour and travel motives of tourists to adventure destinations.Objective threeo To determine the profiles and travel motives of adventure tourists to Magoebaskloof Adventures.Objective fouro To make recommendations and to draw conclusions, based on the information uncovered.1.4 METHOD OF RESEARCH1.4.1 Literature studyThe literature study will consist of an analysis of the travel motivations of adventure tourism. To gather information on the above, the following sources will be consulted:* Theses and Dissertations on completed studies that offer the information needed for the purpose of this study;* Search engines specifically aimed at accurate research including Library databases, scientific databases and the Internet; together with* Articles on adventure tourism and travel motivations gathered from scientific journals, SA newspapers and SA magazines.Keywords: Adventure, Adventure tourism, Travel motives1.4.2 Empiric survey1.4.2.1 Research design and method of collecting dataA quantitative research approach was followed and the collecting of data was done by means of questionnaires. Conducting a visitor¡¦s survey is of high value when developing an accurate set of data that may then be interrogated to determine more identifiable issues such as demographic profiles, visitors¡¦ perceptions and visitors¡¦ experiences (Prideaux & Crosswell, 2006:368).There are advantages of the quantitative approach in that:* Sample size is larger;
* A questionnaire is most suitable for collecting demographical information, for example, concerning gender, age and province of residence;* It is relatively inexpensive to conduct; and* It is relatively easy to tabulate and analyse the resulting data using statistical software.(Maree and Pieterson, 2007:155)1.4.2.2 Selection of the sampling frameIt is imperative that the target population is defined properly and accurately in order to answer the correct research question and so obtain relevant results (Aaker et al., 2007:380). Tustin et al. (2005:340) state that the population must be defined in terms of the sample units and sample elements, as well as in terms of the extent and time of conducting the study. Accordingly, the target population in this study will consist of tourists visiting Magoebaskloof Adventures. The survey was conducted over a period of 9 months.Magoebaskloof adventures was chosen for this study as it is a prominent adventure resort in Limpopo province, supplying a variety of high class adventure activities to local adventure tourists, as well as to adventure tourists from other provinces in South Africa and to the occasional international tourist. Magoebaskloof adventures receive approximately 2000 (N) visitors per year.   Crompton (1985:14) indicated that a sample size of 333 (n) from a population of 2000 would result in a sample error of 5%. A sample error of 5% implies that if 60% of a population indicate that they will visit a resort at least once or twice a month, the real number will vary between 55% and 65% of the surveyed population. This is the maximum interval wherein sampling error may occur.1.4.2.3 Sampling methodA non-probability sampling method was followed, more specifically, the convenient sampling method. This method is ideal as it allows for situations where population elements are selected because they are easily and conveniently available. It isquick, cost effective and is useful in exploratory research where the researcher is interested
in getting an inexpensive, quick approximation of the truth (Pieterson & Maree, 2007:177).The study was carried out at Magoebaskloof Adventures (Limpopo province). Questionnaires were distributed at the Magoebaskloof Adventures office to be completed by tourists after participating in the adventure activities. This was done between March 2010 and December 2010, and 400 (n) completed questionnaires were received.1.4.2.4 Development of questionnaireThe questionnaire was developed based on a format similar to one that had been developed by the Institute of Tourism and Leisure Studies at the North-West University of South Africa and previously used to conduct studies in South African National Parks. The questionnaire was adapted to fit the adventure market by looking at research previously done on travel motives by Swarbrooke et al. (2003), Van der Merwe (2009), Saayman, Slabbert and Van der Merwe (2009). The methods of the studies were analysed and adapted to finalise the questionnaire.The first section of the questionnaire, the demographic information, remained the same. Section B was aimed at the economic information offered by participants and included a Likert scale determining what adventure activities the participant found important.   A Likert scale was further used to rate the reasons why participants take part in adventure activities. In section C, the consumer profile was further defined by seeking participants¡¦ preferences. Finally, questions about the visitors¡¦ perceptions of the resorts¡¦ services and facilities were asked.In summary, the questionnaire is divided into three sections:* In Section A, the demographic information of respondents is determined. This includes home language, year of birth, country of residence, the province lived in and the highest level of education.* In Section B,the importance of adventure activities as well as the reasons why tourists participate in activities is measured on a Likert scale.* Section C determines the advertising material the tourists use on a daily basis. The resort services and facilities are also rated on a Likert scale.
The items were measured on a five point Likert scale of 1 (not important at all) to 5 (extremely important). Likert scales are a very useful and common method used in survey research to determine what respondents think or feel about a certain subject (Maree & Pieterson, 2007:167).1.4.2.5 Data analysisA factor analysis was completed to attempt to create a smaller number of variables. The software that was used for the statistic processing was MicrosoftTM, ExcelTM and SPSSý (Statistical Package for the Social Sciences). A factor analysis was conducted to indicate which of the travel motives were considered more important to participants. Tabachnick and Fiddel (2001:25) and Field (2006:619) explain a factor analysis as being a statistical method used to uncover the dimensions of a set of variables by reducing a large number of variables to a smaller number of factors. The purpose of a factor analysis is to describe the variance/covariance relationship among many variables in terms of a few underlying, but unobservable, random quantities referred to as factors. The factor model can be grouped according to the correlations. That is, all variables in a particular group are highly correlated among themselves, but small correlations may take place with variables in a different group. If this is the case, it is conceivable that each group of variables represents a single underlying factor that is responsible for the observed correlations. It is this type of structure that a factor analysis seeks to confirm (Kim & Mueller. 1978:12). A total of seven factors were identified after the factor analysis was conducted.A principle axis factor analysis with Oblimin rotation was performed on the 24 travel motivational items for adventure tourists using SPSSý (2007).   According to Kruger and Saayman (2010:5),¡§rotation implies an orthogonal transformation of factor loadings, and is used in practice to obtain a more interpretable and ¡¦simpler¡¥ structure. Oblique rotations are often used in social sciences and entail a non-rigid rotation of the co-ordinate axes. While orthogonal rotations assume the factors to be independent, this is not assumed with oblique rotations. Oblique rotations also seek to minimise the number of factors extracted¡¨.
By using the oblique rotation, the factor matrix was split into two matrices ¡V a pattern matrix and a structure matrix. According to Kruger and Saayman (2010:5), these two matrices are the same when orthogonal rotation is used. Field (2005:668) however found that in using oblique rotation, the pattern matrix contains the factor loadings while the structure matrix takes the relationship between the factors into account. To determine if the pattern matrix was suitable for factor analysis, the Kaiser-Meyer- Olkin measure of sampling adequacy was used, a sampling measure considering, and only using, Eigen values larger than one as significant (Kozak, 2002:224).1.5 DEFINING THE CONCEPTSThe following concepts have been used regularly throughout the dissertation:1.5.1 Adventure TourismAdventure is where participants voluntarily place themselves in a position where they believe they are stepping into the unknown, and so they can expect to face challenges. There is some fear present inadventure tourism, but the participant is in total control of the situation while challenging him or herself. Adventure tourists discover or gain something valuable from the experience (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:14; Priest & Gass, 2005:49). Mortlock (as cited by Varley, 2006:175) proposed four stages of adventure:1. Play,2. Adventure,3. Frontier adventure and, lastly,4. Misadventure.These stages progress from performing at a level below the participant¡¦s capabilities with minimal skill requirement and minimal risk, to being challenged beyond the capabilities and comfort zones of participants, which can lead to possible harm or injury for them.Four key elements of adventure are:* Risk,* Responsibility,* Uncertainty, and
* Commitment (Varley, 2006:176).Adventure tourism involves the travel and leisure activities that are contracted into with the hope that they will produce a rewarding adventure experience (Swarbrooke, Beard, Leckie & Pomfret, 2003). Adventure tourists are often young, educated, affluent, active, thrill seekers who spend significant amounts of money in the pursuit of adventure (Williams & Soutar, 2009:415). Thus, from the above, it can be said that:adventure tourism is taking part in activities where risk is involved and a challenge is perceived in a natural environment.1.5.2 Travel MotivesMotivation is the act of giving somebody a reason to act. Travel is to go on a journey to a particular place, usually using a form of transportation. Thus, travel motivation is having a reason to travel to a specific place (Encarta, 2009:1).   Motivation occurs when an individual wants to satisfy a need. Theories indicate that participants or individuals constantly strive to achieve a state of stability or a homeostasis (Goossens, 2000:302). Another aspect of motivation is the push and pull theory of Crompton (1979, as cited by Fluker & Turner, 2000:381). Push factors are the sociopsychological needs that would encourage someone to travel. These factors are internally-generated drives that encourage participants to look for signs in, for instance, objects, situations and events. The pull factor is one in which the person is aroused or motivated by the destination.   Pull factors are generated by knowledge about goal attributes that the participant holds (Fluker & Turner, 2000:381). Thus, motivation is the:need to travel after considering all the aspects and factors of the chosen destination or activity.1.5.3 Magoebaskloof AdventuresMagoebaskloof Adventures are one of Limpopo province¡¦s popular adventure resorts. They are an adventure resort situated in Georges Valley, Limpopo Province. The facilities are in the picturesque Georges Valley on the banks of the great Letaba River (Non?, 2009:1). They offer a range of adventure activities that include quad biking, kloofing (canyoning), abseiling, fly-fishing, teambuilding challenges, tubing,
paintball and horse riding. Magoebaskloof Adventures has grown over the last seven years into a well-developed resort with clients from all over South Africa, and even some international tourists. They also offer include teambuilding activities for school and corporate groups. The beautiful surroundings makes Magoebaskloof adventures the ideal place for the survey.Map 1.1: Location of Magoebaskloof Adventures1.5.4 Nature based tourismNature tourism consists of wildlife tourism, nature-based tourism and adventure tourism. Nature tourism is to travel to enjoy natural surroundings and engage in a variety of outdoor activities that can include bird-watching, fishing and hiking (Travel dictionary, 2012:1). Nature based tourism is set in the great outdoors, and is based on the use of natural resources in the wild and undeveloped form thereof. Eco- tourism and wildlife tourism fall under the nature-based tourism category (Swarbrooke et al, 2003:21). Nature¡Vbased tourism can be seen as all tourism that is directly dependent on the use of natural surroundings that is in a relatively undeveloped condition. This includes water features, topography, scenery, vegetation and the wildlife in that area (Ceballos-Lascurain, 1996 as cited by Espinoza, 2010:2).1.6 PRELIMINARY CHAPTER CLASSIFICATIONThe chapters discussing the project and its results will be structured as follows:Chapter 1: Introduction and problem statementThis first chapter will address the introduction to what adventure tourism entails. The problem statement is discussed, as well as the primary and secondary objectives of
the study. Thereafter the method of research is discussed. The important terms are defined and, finally, the chapter layout is given so that the reader may know what to expect.Chapter 2: A theoretical analysis of adventure tourismThis second chapter will consist of a theoretical analysis of adventure tourism by examining the history of adventure tourism. The term adventure tourism will then be analysed and discussed in order to gain a better understanding of adventure tourism. The different types of adventure travel are discussed including the activities they entail. Lastly, the adventure travel market is discussed.Chapter 3: A literature analysis of tourist behaviour and travel motivesThe third chapter seeks to determine what the tourists¡¦ behaviour is and their specific travel motives. Tourist travel behaviour, as well as the choice decision making process, are analysed and discussed within this chapter to seek a better understanding of tourist travel behaviour. Travel motives are analysed by looking at the different motivation models as crafted by Maslow, Iso-Ahola, Crompton and Plog. Previous studies of travel motivation are analysed to determine the main motivations for travel. These are then compared with the specific motivations of adventure tourists obtain from previous research studies and literature.Chapter 4: Empirical resultsChapter 4 seeks to record the statistical analyses of collected data gathered from the survey undertaken at Magoebaskloof Adventures. The method of research will first be examined, and a profile of an adventure tourist determined. Factor analyses will be completed to further define the motivations of adventure tourists. The results will be given in the form of graphs and tables. Recommendations based on the findings of the research will subsequently be made.Chapter 5: Conclusions and recommendationsThe fifth and final chapter will focus on summarising each chapter. Conclusions will be drawn from the research and the data gathered concerning the travel motivations of adventure tourists. Firstly, conclusions regarding the literature analysis ofadventure tourism, secondly, conclusions regarding the literature analysis of
adventure tourists¡¦ motives and thirdly, conclusions regarding the empirical research will then be made. Recommendations, drawn also from the information gathered, will be given and would be useful for future planning and future marketing activities.
CHAPTER 2A THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF ADVENTURE TOURISM2.1 INTRODUCTIONAdventure tourism has been a pastime of the human race for a long time.   At first, it was not recognised as adventure tourism by the participants as it was rather seen as a way of living and, as such, not thought of as a leisure activity (Van der Merwe, 2009:221). Early ¡§adventurers¡¨ included groups such as pilgrims, traders, seasonal migrates, mercenaries, traders, hunters and merchants on expedition. Many of their adventures led to somewhat-accidental discoveries, such as Columbus who discovered the Caribbean while seeking an alternate route to the spice lands of the Orient (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:40; Yessis, 2006:1).Since the early adventurers, adventure tourism has grown into a popular niche and has become a rapidly expanding sector of the tourism industry (Swarbrooke et al.,2003 as cited by Pomfret, 2006:114; Bentley, Page & Macky, 2007:791). One reason for this growth can perhaps be closely tied to the fact that modern-day living and work life can lack clear meaning. Thus, people opt to search for meaning and fulfilment through active participation in leisure activities and tourism. Participants are seeking for that deep embodied experience unavailable in everyday life (Van der Merwe, 2009:236). They believe that adventure tourism can provide such experiences, as well as assisting to overcome certain fears of life. Through adventure, new skills can be learned and developed, so assisting in maintaining an exciting and creative life with great experiences and challenges (Schumpeter, 2006b:1).Adventure tourism is based on a wide spectrum of activities, from the less energetic activities (bird watching, snorkelling and hot air ballooning) to ultra-fit thrill-seeking activities (bungee jumping, diving with great white sharks, paragliding and white water rafting) (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:5).   Adventure tourism has a major role to play in the attractiveness of a destination, as it offers tourists a variety of activities taking place in magnificent landscapes, breath-taking views and diverse landscapes (BrandSouth Africa, 2010:1; Page, William & Connell, 2006:52).
The aim of this chapter is to conduct a theoretical analysis of adventure tourism. This chapter will address the history of adventure tourism, the concept of adventure tourism, soft and hard adventure, the profile of adventure tourists, the different types of adventure activities, as well as the different types of adventure travel, the impacts of adventure tourism and finally, the reason why adventure tourists participate in adventure activities will be discussed.2.2 THE HISTORY OF ADVENTURE TOURISMAdventure tourism has always been a part of the human race, even though the participants of that time did not see it as adventure tourism, but rather as discovery of new places.   For them it was a way of life, instead of a leisure activity (Van der Merwe, 2009:221). Tourism dates back as far as ancient Greece and ancient Rome as there is evidence of tourism from these eras in terms of travel writing (Swarbrooke & Horner, 2007:13).According to Swarbrooke et al. (2003), the following groups are seen as the pioneers of the adventure tourism industry:HedonistsHedonism, or pleasure seeking, has a particularly long history. Indeed, it was the Greeks who were largely responsible for introducing the idea. Hedonism is the desire for sensual pleasures, and there is an age-old willingness to travel in search thereof. Examples of places to where hedonism today attracts a market include Paris from the nineteenth century, Amsterdam (with its legal marijuana trade), Hamburg (with its legalised ¡§red light¡¨ district), Hong Kong¡¦s Suzie Wong image (again, a ¡§red light¡¨ reputation), Shanghai, (the excitement capital of the Far East), Las Vegas (gambling and legalised prostitution) and Rio de Janeiro (the ¡§anything goes¡¨ atmosphere of the Carnival (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:40; Swarbrooke & Horner, 2007:14).Explorers and adventurersSome of the great explorers in history include Ericson, who is credited with having discovered North America, Columbus, the Caribbean, Bartholomeu Dias who in 1488
discovered the Cape of Good Hope and Amelia Earhart, pilot extraordinaire who believed that adventure was worthwhile of itself, to name but four of the more famous. Stories of bold explorers and fearless adventurers, searching for new lands and charting previously unknown places have been part of stories told to children for ages (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:41; Yessis, 2006:1; Squidoo, 2010:1).MercenariesMotivated by a need to earn a living and, sometimes, by a need for adrenaline, mercenaries offered their services as fighters to help others in need ¡V provided they would be paid. Mercenaries faced dangers in battle, and had cultural adventures while working for kings and governments in countries with few traditions and customs of their own. Mercenaries are not just a form of history though, as the famous Ghurkha¡¦s, current ¡V and mercenary - members of the UK armed forces, have fought as mercenaries under the British flag in countries such as Bosnia, Afghanistan and Iraq (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:41).PilgrimsPilgrimage is one of the oldest forms of tourism, and pilgrims are seen as an early form of adventure tourism. Pilgrims travelled through relatively unknown country to spiritual sites, often in other countries. This was, indeed, an emotional adventure as lives were often changed irrevocably, either through the journey or through experiences at its end. The pilgrimages were accurately seen as risky as robbers preyed on the routes seeing pilgrims as easy prey (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:42; Swarbrooke & Horner, 2007:15).In modern days, three types of pilgrims can be found: The first is Western travellers, travelling east in search of spiritual enlightenment. The second is people living very stressful lives and who see monasteries as a place where they can reduce their stress levels with the change in lifestyle (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:42). A third type would be the pilgrimage to Mecca, a religious requirement for all Muslims. Another example of a modern day pilgrimage is the gathering by the Zionist Christian Church (ZCC) at Mount Moria in the Limpopo province of South Africa that occurs every year on Easter weekend. This is when the largest religious grouping in Africa (about four
million members throughout the African continent and the Middle East) comes together to celebrate at Mount Moria (Szabo, 2009:1).TradersTraders have been around at least as long as pilgrims, but instead of travelling to cultural sites, they travelled to new and unknown places to trade and often suffered from criminal attacks on themselves and their goods (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:42).Settlers and colonisersSettlers and colonisers travelled to a new destination with the purpose of making it their permanent home. One well known example of settlers in South Africa would be Jan van Riebeeck who, with 90 other men, landed at the Cape of Good Hope in 1652. They travelled under the instruction of the Dutch East India Company, and their purpose was to provide provisions for ships travelling to East India (SAinfo, 2012:1). For this reason, they built a fort and started a settlement.   As such, they were not adventure ¡¥tourists¡¦ per se. The journey to the new places was an adventure, but they settled when they arrived at their destination. They did, however, subsequently aid tourism through the friends and family that visited them (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:42).Seasonal migrantsSeasonal migrants travelled largely for work purposes. This was particularly true of rural communities. Where farming was poor, many farmers had secondary jobs as skilled artisans. The farmers would travel and take their skills to nearby towns, other regions and even other countries, if necessary. This was adventurous for them as they travelled to different regions with different traditions, dialects and languages. Women too often had to travel to work as maids or wet nurses to help nurture and raise other people¡¦s children. This was potentially dangerous and adventurous for them as they came from small, perhaps closed, villages and had to work in the big city with all the attendant challenges and temptations (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:43).MissionariesMissionaries were sent out to try to convert people to their religious views.   Their travels and tribulations often tested their faith severely. They were often required to
live amongst the poorest people at their chosen destination.   The threat of robbery was often faced, as well as the challenges of disease and violence when they wandered off the beaten track. Today, missionaries can be singled out for capture, ransom, and perhaps worse, by terrorists, bandits and even representatives of legal governments. In this sense, their mission can indeed be seen as an ¡§adventure¡¨ (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:43).The ¡¥Outward Bound¡¦ traditionThe ¡¥Outward Bound¡¦ tradition is where participants put themselves against nature and their own weaknesses and fears to build character and to reach a better understanding of their own capabilities.This initially implies that the participants opt to continue, opt to endure, rather than take the easy option and give in. This proves that personal challenges and difficulties can be overcome by the adventurer (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:44).Romantic era mountain sportsThe upper classes of developed countries started to partake in mountain sports, such as rock climbing and skiing to ¡¥test¡¦ their skills.   This particular form of adventure tourism was part of the European Romantic Movement and took place around the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (Infoplease, 2007:1). The actions emphasised nature and endowed the mountains with a spiritual, almost mystical quality. The romantic era is a thing of the past today, but tourists still seek adventure in the mountains, climbing, skiing, and now snowboarding, as they believe in the echoing ideas of romantics from years ago (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:44).Natural historiansNatural historians indulged in their own form of adventure tourism by travelling to unexplored territories in search of new species of flora and fauna. They often undertook dangerous journeys overcoming great challenges to reach these little known places. The main adventure for these natural historians was an intellectual one. They saw themselves as pushing back the boundaries of scientific knowledge. To these particular adventurers, the adventure was almost incidental to the result ¡V an increase of humanity¡¦s knowledge (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:44).
Woman travellersWoman travellers played a major role in the development of adventure tourism. More and more women became interested in getting off the beaten track to start wandering the world. These women travelled to dangerous places much different from their own country to experience physical adventure and to challenge the ideas of their time about the role of women in society (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:45; Shumpes, 2002:1).Travel writer adventurersThe oldest recognised travel writing dates back to ancient Greece. In recent decades, there has been a development in travel writers as the travel related media expanded. The writers travel to far-off places, and leave the beaten track behind to share their experiences through their writings, with the armchairtraveller at home. Writers go to extreme lengths, for example, cycling through Africa, to explore the hidden places. The articles are also often written with tongue-in-the-cheek humour relating to the authors character than as the geographically accurate tomes (Swarbrooke & Horner, 2007:14; Swarbrooke et al., 2003:46).Modern day examples of travel writings include several internet pages such as Adventure travel writer, Travel Intelligence, Transitions abroad. There are many others. Travel magazines include the famous and renowned National Geographic, Adventure, Getaway, Encounter South Africa and SAflyer. Travel writers include Hilary Bradt, Anthony Sattin, Jacques Marais and Carrie Hampton (Siyabona, 2010:1; Allyoucanread, 2010:1) and many, many others, professional and amateur, humorous and dour, competent and otherwise.The expression of the restless soulA small number of people find it difficult to fit into conventional society. They use adventure tourism as a means to express their restless spirit, to give vent to the urgings of a restless spirit. The women travellers mentioned earlier are one such example. Other well-known examples of such might be Lawrence of Arabia in the Middle East, and Matisse in the South Sea Islands (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:46).
HuntingIn many cultures, hunting is a form of adventure travel. Historically, it used to be a way of getting food, of adding protein to the diet. Largely, in the developed (and developing) world, it has now become a leisure activity. It frequently takes place in inhospitable areas, and involves contact, albeit at a distance, with dangerous animals. It can also be highly competitive, and there is a chance that the hunter might be harmed if he or she fails to perform satisfactory (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:46). According to Blain (2010:1), hunting became a sport in the second era of the evolution of man, the growth of civilization. The Romans were the first to take the sport of hunting to a new level as they started to capture animals alive, either to sell, or for the gladiatorial competitions (Blain, 2010:1).Artificial environment adventuresPreviously, adventurers challenged the elements of nature, but today they find challenges in artificial environments created indoors. Project Adventure was one of the major points in artificial adventureenvironments in 1972, known for rope challenge courses and games for building trust and teamwork (Neill, 2004:1). Artificial environments such as indoor ski slopes, indoor walls to be climbed as substitutes for rock-faces, water sport facilities and virtual reality simulators are a growing feature in adventure tourism. These do, however, lack certain qualities that are often seen as integral to the adventure, for instance, natural weather conditions, views and fresh air (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:47).Designer adrenaline risksDesigner consumers are those driven by the desire to be seen at the cutting edge of fashion.   It is vital that the activities have features that are new, and that participants can develop their own social mores, specialist clothing and patios. Early designerrisks include mountain biking and bungee jumping, and of course, snowboarding. This kind of tourist integrates physical activity with clothing, language and the clean trappings of a distinct sub-culture (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:48). Some of the clothing brands inspired by the adrenaline and adventure activities include brands such as Jeep, Billabong, Roxy and Respiro, to name just some of the leaders.
Sex tourismDuring Marco Polo¡¦s travels, he came across villages in China where the women came out to sleep with the passing travellers in return for small trinkets. These trinkets were then displayed as proof of a girls¡¦ popularity and demonstrated her superior worth as a marriage prospect. During wartime, the military contributed to sex tourism by sending prostitutes over the border successfully to infect enemy soldiers with diseases such as syphilis. The US army were responsible for turning Bangkok into Asia¡¦s sex capital as, after the war, the red light scene had already found place on the map and the blossoming budget travel industry took over (Roadjunky, 2008:1). Sex tourism is not a new phenomenon but it has reached new levels. The risks in sex tourism are the danger of diseases, facing criminal prosecution and being targeted by criminals for either robbery or blackmail (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:48).The next section of the chapter will focus on the definition of adventure tourism and will provide an in-depth study of what adventure tourism entails.2.3 What is adventure tourism?The question of what adventure tourism is will be addressed in the following section by discussing adventure, adventure tourism, adventure tourist and adventure activities.2.3.1 AdventureBefore adventure tourism can be explored, the term adventure must first be clarified. Adventure is defined as the deliberate search of risk and uncertain outcomes, where the principal attraction is an outdoor activity that relies on the natural terrain and generally requires specialised gear (Ewert, as cited by Weber, 2001:361; Buckley, 2007:1428).   Barb (2010:1) offers that to adventure is to explore a remote area, a forest, exotic hostile areas or mountains, requires a lot of physical activities, cultural exchange and engagement with nature. The term, ¡§adventure¡¨, can be associated with words such as: thrill, fear, challenge, terror, risk, daring, adrenaline, journey, ultimate, expedition, conquer, excitement, roughing it, elation, awe inspiring and success (van der Merwe, 2009:221).
There is some fear present in adventure, but the participant is in total control of the situation while challenging him or herself. According to Swarbrooke et al. (2003:7), adventure has a different meaning for different people or participants. As previously stated, adventure provides thrills and adrenaline to the participants. It is exciting and challenging. Adventure also contains journey, fear, terror, feeling of the ultimate challenge and ¡§roughing it¡¨. Adventure can be awe-inspiring with feelings of conquering and of success, but can also be daring and risky (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:7). Muller and Cleaver (2000, as cited by Pomfret, 2006:114) characterised adventure by its ability to provide the participant with relatively high levels of sensory stimulation that are usually achieved by including physically challenging experiential components.Mortlock (1984:22) proposed four stages of adventure, namely; play; adventure; frontier adventure and, lastly misadventure. Play indicates the absence of fear, and the activity can be pleasant or fun, as well as boring. Adventure indicates some form of fear is present. The participant is in control of the activity and is being challenged. Frontier adventure indicates that a high level of fear is present and the participant experience the risk of physical harm. When too much fear is present, it leads to a state of misadventure and failure (Priest & Gass, 2005:49).   These stages progress from performing within the capabilities of the participants, with minimal skill requirement and minimal risk, to being challenged beyond the capabilities and comfort zones of participants. Of course, this can lead to harm or injury for them. Adventure consists of four key elements, risk; responsibility; uncertainty; and commitment (Varley, 2006:176).Figure 2.1: Definition of AdventureAdventure can be further classified into two categories, soft or hard adventure.
2.3.1.1 Soft and hard adventureFirstly, soft adventure can be described as one of the fastest growing segments in tourism travel, and can be enjoyed by anyone looking for more than just the typical vacation to a beach or sightseeing. Adventure tours or activities normally supplement the traditional vacation and could include trips to destinations that offer ecotourism, special interest expeditions or themes (Soft adventure tourism, 2010:1). In the next section, the term soft adventure will be discussed in more detail.Soft adventure refers to activities that have perceived risks, but requires less physical skill and little or no experience. It allows for convenience in terms of sleeping arrangements and cuisine. For the alternative traveller, soft adventure offers a wider range of activities and adventure experiences (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:33; Mallet, 2010:1; Allen, 2010:1; Van der Merwe, 2009:230). Soft adventure requires a minimal commitment and only beginning skills. It is often associated with activities such as camping, biking, sailing, horseback riding and photographic safaris (Mill, 2010:1) and is led by experienced guides (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:33). Jenkins (2008:1) summarises soft adventure as,¡§A travel experience that is rewarding for spirit and mind, is safe and without excessive physical demands, that goes beyond the typical tourist itinerary¡¨.On the other hand, hard adventure refers to activities associated with a high level of risk and participants here must be both physically and mentally fit. Hard adventure include activities such as sky-diving, white-water rafting or kayaking, rock climbing, cave exploration, survival games and mountaineering, for example (Mill, 2010:1). Participants in hard adventure thrive when they are exposed to activities with associated high levels of risk. Participants are more likely to engage in physically, as well as mentally, challenging outdoor activities that demand a great deal of previous experience and high levels of competence. Participants receive an adrenaline rush from taking risks, and most of the time, they can control the risks because of their skill and experience (Swarbrooke et al.,2003:64). An intense level of commitment is necessary, for adverse weather conditions, primitive sleeping accommodations and an unusual or limited diet are of no great concern. Hard adventure often includes an intimate experience with the destination¡¦s environment and culture (Swarbrooke et
al., 2003:33; Mallet, 2010:1; Allen, 2010:1; Van der Merwe, 2009:230). Hard adventure can be summarised as follows:It is a travel experience that has a higher risk element, requires a great physical challenge, is rewarding to the spirit and pushes people to step out of their comfort zone (Jenkins, 2008:1).Adventure tourists either discover or gain something valuable from the experience (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:14; Priest & Gass, 2005:49).Figure 2.2: Summary of Adventure TourismEco-tourism and adventure tourism both form part of nature-based tourism and have certain aspects in common:* Adventure and eco-tourism takes place in the outdoors;* A required level of competence is needed to participate in the activity;* A certain level of effort is required;* There is a degree of remoteness;* Opportunity for responsibility; and* Level of contrivance(Van der Merwe, 2009:230).2.3.2 Adventure tourismAlthough adventure tourism overlaps with other forms of tourism, adventurers have a number of attributes that distinguish them from other forms of tourism markets (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:56).Figure 2.3 offers an illustration as to how adventure tourism fits into the tourism environment.Adventure tourism, nature-based tourism and wildlife tourism are subcategories of nature tourism. As already discussed, Adventure tourism also divides into soft
adventure and hard adventure (Wood, 2002:11).	Adventure tourism can thus be defined as:tourism that implies the minimum influence on civilisation and is intimately linked to intact natural surroundings:the search for personal redemption through challenge and sacrifice, where nature is the backdrop to an intensely personal experience.Figure 2.3: Adventure tourism: a form of nature tourism (Espinoza, 2010:2)Nature dictates the rules and provides the setting for human play. Most of the pure adventure activities appeal to the animal instinct by pushing the limits of muscular strength and survival (Active-tourism, 2002:1).According to Swarbrooke et al. (2003:36) many adventure pursuits arguably fall into the wider definition of sport- and recreation-related activities that are undertaken while on holiday. Adventure tourism can thus be viewed as travel to a destination to take part in adventurous activities, rather than adventure travel, which is conceptually different and posits travel itself as adventure. Adventure tourism can be a place- specific experience and the attributes of the place are often facilitated only by the natural surroundings (Weber, 2001, as cited by Page, William & Connell, 2006:52). Ewert (1989, as cited by Page, William & Connell, 2006:52) defines adventure tourism as the deliberate seeking of risk and uncertainty of outcome. Walle (1997, as cited by Weber, 2001:360) argues that adventure tourism is the quest for insight and knowledge, rather than risk, and has its origin in traditional outdoor recreation. Walle
believes that although both types involve activities and specific skills in outdoor settings, they differ in deliberately seeking risk and uncertainty of outcome associated with adventure recreation (Weber, 2001:361).Adventure travel can also be defined as aleisure activity that takes place in an unusual, exotic, remote or wilderness destination.It tends to be associated with high levels of activity by the participant, most of it outdoors (Bentley and Page, 2008:859). An important aspect is that adventure tourism contains an element of personal challenge, through controlled risk, daring and/or excitement and often takes place in an inaccessible or wilderness environment. When defining adventure tourism, the element of risk must always be considered when describing an activity (Fluker and Turner, 2000:380). Adventure tourism involves travel and leisure activities that are contracted into with the hope that they will produce a rewarding, adventure experience (Swarbrooke et al., 2003). Those who pay considerable sums of money to climb Mount Everest may offer perfect examples of this type of tourist.2.3.2.1 Forms of adventure travellingHowever, there is more to adventure tourism than mere adrenaline-raising activities. Adventure tourism or travel is more than the just-mentioned due to the different types of adventure sought by tourists. The types of adventure tourism range from soft adventure to hard adventure, as indicated earlier in the chapter, and there is something to suit the taste of any adventurer. The following are each different forms of adventure travelling:Disaster tourismPeople are curious about areas that have recently been affected by disasters, be the disasters natural or man-made. Examples include tsunami-affected areas, earthquake zones, bomb blast areas and flooded country. People may travel to these disaster regions to gather information about the disaster for learning purposes (Barb, 2010:1).
Jungle tourismOne popular form of adventure is rainforest trekking. These treks involve exploring the jungle regions of the earth. Jungle tourism is also known as green tourism in tropical destinations. This form of adventure falls under the soft adventure category. It is seen as a form of travel where the adventurer explores undeveloped, natural and culturally sensitive areas with a desire to experience it, while leaving it intact and unchanged. Adventurers aim to study, to admire and to enjoy the scenery and its flora and fauna, as well as the existing cultural manifestations (Degnan, 2010:1; Ceballos-Lascurain, as cited by Van der Merwe, 2009:3).Accessible tourismAccessible tourism overlaps the line of hard and soft tourism, and focuses on the travel for the physically challenged tourists. There have been many improvements made to transport and destinations to allow for facilitated access and today, even the physically challenged can enjoy adventure travel. Excursions are now provided where the mobility-challenged travellers can participate in cultural exploration and, perhaps, in extreme activities such as bungee-jumping and white-water rafting. This is a growing industry that seeks to provide the participants with the opportunity to participate in personally rewarding, adrenaline-inducing adventure experiences, which would otherwise be out of reach (Barb, 2010:1; Degnan, 2010:1).Ethno tourismEthno tourism is another form of soft adventure tourism.   Travellers go to new places to explore the culture and behaviours of the local people of the foreign regions and countries. The main reason for travelling is to discover a non-scientific gain from the society visited, and it often involves long treks into undeveloped areas.   Tourists visit the tribal areas in the ethno-tourism, and they will sometimes make first contact with the tribes. This however, can have negative effects as travellers can inadvertently expose the ethnic tribes to illnesses for which the tribes do not have immunity (Barb, 2010:1; Degnan, 2010:1).Urban explorationThis form of adventure travelling involves exploring urban areas and inhabited lands. Other known terms are ¡¥Urban caving¡¦, ¡¥Urban spelunking¡¦ or ¡¥Building hacking¡¦.
There are also both physical dangers and the possibility of arrest and punishment (Barb, 2010:1).Overland travelIn simple terms, it refers to an ¡¥Overland journey¡¦ that is similar to the journey of Marco Polo¡¦s first expedition during the 13th century from Venice to the Chinese court. In modern days, overlanding is a form of adventure tourism where groups travel together, making long journeys by crossing many countries and oceans (Barb, 2010:1; Degnan, 2010:1). A very popular example of overland travel is the trip by road from Cairo to Cape Town. South Africa has overland tour packages as well, for example, Drifters that offer a variety of adventure tours to inbound tourists as well as international tourist (Drifters, 2012:1).Thrill tourismThis form of adventure tourism is the best-known form of hard adventure. Some of the most popular activities are bungee-jumping, white-water rafting, base-jumping, mountaineering, parasailing, rock climbing and spelunking. The term also applies to any other activity that incites an adrenaline rush and has a risk of danger. Since the most thrilling adventure activities involve extreme risk, it is done usually through an established company that can provide the necessary safety and has the training needed to allow the traveller to complete the activity (Degnan, 2010:1).2.3.3 Adventure touristAn adventure tourist is defined assomeone who is seeking out an original and exciting holiday, with an opportunity to engage in self-discovery and cultural exchange, in a faraway place (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:56).Adventure tourists greatly differ from each other regarding motives, behaviour and experiences (Van Der Merwe, 2009:236).   The aspect of motivation will be addressed in Chapter 3. Adventurers expect to experience high levels of risk, excitement and tranquillity, and to be personally tested due to the physically demanding nature of
activities (Active-tourism, 2002:1). They are explorers of unspoilt, exotic parts of the planet and seek personal challenge (Bentley and Page, 2008:859).In the following section, the adventure tourist will be analysed.2.3.3.1 Adventure tourist, lifestyle, ages, groups and adventureIt is important to know how adventure tourists are different from tourists in general, to ensure that resources are used correctly in order to benefit product development, service quality evaluation, image development and promotional activities (Van der Merwe & Saayman, 2008:154). In the following section, the profile of the adventure tourists will now be examined.Adventure tourism does not interest only the youth market but spans over a broad range of people and age groups. It has been found that adventure tourists make their holiday choices according to their lifestyles and not based primarily on their ages.	Thus, a physically active pensioner can participate in river rafting,  while a young graduate, for example, may prefer a relaxing holiday with friends. It has been recorded by tour operators that the average age of adventure travellers is, rather surprisingly, between 40 and 45 years old.	This supports the idea that lifestyle, rather than age, influences a tourist¡¦s holiday decision. (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:60). It is necessary to look at the profile and character of adventure tourists to understand better why they participate in adventure activities.	According to the literature available, adventure tourists tend to be young, educated, affluent active thrill seekers who have significant sums of money to spend in their pursuit of adventures (Williams & Soutar, 2009:415; Active-tourism, 2002:1). Kumar, (2009:13), believes that tourists are looking for an adventure when they travel and that they want to see a destination through the eyes of the local population. Tourists of today attribute more importance to the benefits that they can gain from their holidays, in particular, from the uniqueness of the experience, than did the travellers of yesteryear.	Formerly, tourists were more homogeneous and predictable in their tastes and regarded travel itself as a novelty.	They were interested in warm destinations and the quality of services rendered to them was not too important. The main reason they went on holiday was to escape from work and their home life, and travelling in groups made
them feel secure (Swarbrooke, 2003:58).Figure 2.4 illustrates the distinctive characteristics of adventure tourists of today.Figure 2.4 Characteristics of adventure tourists (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:59)In Figure 2.4 above, it can be seen that adventure tourists have had more experience in travelling, and have had more fun and adventure than the average tourist has had. Adventure tourists are independent and want to be in charge of the risks they take.They are more flexible, spontaneous and have a changed booking behaviour. Their values have changed from ¡§having¡¨ to ¡§being¡¨ and, rather than seeking an escape, they seek to find fulfilment. Their changed lifestyles mean that they have more free time and they choose to take short breaks more frequently. There has been a change in their demographics as the population is ageing, and the households are smaller than they were before (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:59). The following describes the adventure tourists of today:* DemographicsThe participants are young, educated, affluent, active thrill seekers who spend significant amounts of money in the pursuit of adventure (Fluker & Turner, 2000:387; Zaltzman, 2010:1).   Most have a high level of instruction, meaning that they have college degrees and hold professional or special training. According to Queensland tourism (2008:13), adventure tourists tend to be 25- 55 years of age, with a higher than average income. They are mostly married
and travel with their spouse or friends. Males and females are equally represented and they seek new and enriching experiences. They select their destination for its scenery.* BehavioursAdventure tourists follow word-of-mouth recommendations, and take advice from friends who participated in similar adventure activities. They look at trip notes, customer reviews and seek testimonials in written, audio or video format. They usually do not like big corporations (Sung, 2004:352).* Activities they likeAdventure tourists like activities that are fitness orientated, healthy and exciting.   They usually watch programmes on television about history, culture and wildlife, and are active contributors to charity organisations. Participants like to visit museums and art galleries, and to take educational excursions (Schott, 2007:262).* NeedsAdventurers search for safe, if exciting, destinations and want an experienced adventure company. They look for fun activities in unexpected tourist destinations. Participants also like to be heard and have their questions answered (Weber, 2001:372).* MotivationsBecause adventure tourists stay about fifty weeks a year in an office, they have the desire to get away for an experience off the beaten paths. They prefer to travel in an environment-friendly manner and to learn from new cultures. They reflect on ancient religions, try new activities and eat in ethnic restaurants (Weber, 2001:372).* Way of travellingAdventure tourists may travel solo, as couples, in private groups or as honeymooners. They do not like package tours or fancy resorts (Benton, 2008:25).The general profile and characteristics of adventure tourists gives a good idea of who the adventure tourists of today are. The following segment will indicate the motivation of adventure tourists.
2.3.3.2 The motivation of Adventure TouristsOver the last two decades, there has been a major change to tourists¡¦ lifestyles. They have become more health conscious and have developed a heightened sensitivity to green issues (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:57). As in other forms of tourism, the increased demand for tourism has had a positive impact onthe industry. It has been found that people want to get away from the everyday hustle and bustle to find meaning and fulfilment through active participation in adventure activities (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:58). In Chapter Three, the travel motives of adventure tourists will be discussed in depth.2.3.4 Adventure tourism ActivitiesAdventure tourism activities are divided into four categories. These are land-, water-, air-based and mixed activities (which are a combination of land, water and air activities) (Table 2.1).Table 2.1 Adventure activitiesLand-basedWater-basedAir-basedMixed (land/water/air)AbseilingBody boardingBallooningAdventure racingBackpackingCanoeingBungee jumpingCharity challengesBicyclingCruise expeditionsCliff jumpingConservation expeditionsCavingKayakingGlidingCultural experiencesRock climbingSailingHang-glidingGap year travelDog sleddingScuba divingMicro-lightingHedonistic experiencesHikingSnorkellingParaglidingSpiritual enlightenmentHuntingSurfingParachutingWildlife watchingHorseback ridingWater skiingSkydivingJungle exploringWhite-water raftingFlyingMotorcyclingWindsurfingGyrocopteringMountain bikingKite surfingHelicopter flightsMountaineeringWakeboardingZero-G	WeightlessFlights
OrienteeringBlack water raftingQuad bikingPower boatingScramblingCoasteeringSkiingCharter sailingSnowboardingCatamaran sailingSnow mobilingJet bikingSnow shoeingJet boatingWildernessexploringIce climbingBungee jumpingArcheryPower kitingKarting4x4 roadsHover crafting(Van der Merwe, 2009:235)Activities that frequently enjoyed by many adventure tourists are;? Backpacking that combines both hiking and camping as a single activity. A backpacker hikes into the backcountry to spend one or more nights there and carries supplies and equipment to satisfy the sleeping, and eating needs. Backpacking is also a favourite pastime of international tourists, and Europe is favoured destination choice. Tourists from all over the world go to experience the sights, sounds and people of Europe while backpacking (Europe, 2011).
? Cycling is not only a means of transport but of recreation and a sport.   The cyclist travels across land, through tunnels, over bridges and snow. Cycling may involve riding unicycles, bicycles, tricycles and other similar human- powered vehicles (Williams, 2009:270).? Bird watching, or birding, is the study or observation of birds with the naked eye or through binoculars. Birding involves a significant auditory component, as birds are likely to be more easily detected by ear than by the eye. Birdwatchers participate in this activity largely for recreational or social reasons, whereas ornithologists are engaged in the more formal scientific study of birds (Sung et al., 1997:? Bungee jumping originated in New Zealand. This adventure activity entails jumping from a tall structure while connected to a large rubber cord. The intense thrill comes as much from the free-falls as from the rebounds (Sung et al., 1997:50).? Camping is one of the oldest forms of recreation. The participants or campers get away from civilisation to enjoy nature while spending one or more nights at a campsite. It may involve a tent, primitive structure or even no shelter at all (Sung et al., 1997:50).? Canoeing is an activity of paddling a canoe, or kayak, for the purpose of recreation, sport or transportation. The canoe or kayak is propelled by using a single- or double-bladed paddle when the paddler is kneeling or sitting, using only human muscle power(Sung et al., 1997:50).? Cultural tourism is one of the subsets of tourism that concerns itself with acountry or region¡¦s culture and, especially, its arts. Generally, it focuses on the traditional communities that have diverse customs, a unique form of art or distinct social practices that distinguish them from other cultures. Cultural tourism may also include urban areas, in particular, historic cities with museums, ancient buildings and theatres.? Scuba-diving is where the participant swims underwater while using self- contained underwater breathing apparatus.   The scuba diver is able to stay under water longer than usual by using a self-contained source of breathing
gas. This is in contrast to holding their breath for sustained periods as do free divers (Wordpress, 2010:1).? With dog sledding, one or more dogs pull a sled over ice and snow. There are different types of sleds available depending on the function required of them (Wordpress, 2010:1).? Ecotourism forms part of tourism that appeals to the ecologically and socially conscious individuals. They focus on volunteering, personal growth and on learning new ways to live on the planet. Typically, they travel to destinations where fauna, flora and cultural heritage are the primary attractions (Wordpress, 2010:1).? Horseback riding or equestrianism refers to the skill of riding a horse. This includes the use of horses for practical, working purposes as well as recreational activities and competitive sports (Wordpress, 2010:1).? Mountain biking refers to a sport of riding bicycles, possessing particular design characteristics and known as mountain bikes, off-road. The particular sport requires fitness, endurance, self-reliance and bike handling skills? Rafting or white-water rafting is a recreational activity using a raft, often inflatable and purpose-designed to navigate a river or other forms of water. The activity is usually done on white-water or other forms of rough water, in order to thrill and excite the raft passengers (Wordpress, 2010:1).? A safari is an overland journey that is referred to by tourists as a trip to Africa. Traditionally, tourists went on a big-game hunt, but in more recent times, photography and watching big game and other wildlife has become the usual form of safari holiday (Wordpress, 2010:1).? Sailing is to control a sailing vessel by adjusting the rigging, rudder and centreboard. The sailor manages the force of the wind on the sails in order to change the direction and speed of the boat. Experience in various wind and sea conditions are needed in order to master the skill.	Knowledge of the sailboat itself is also important.	Many people enjoy sailing as a recreation activity. These recreational sailors can be further divided into racing, cruising and ¡¥day¡¦ sailors (Wordpress, 2010:1).? Snorkelling is the practice of swimming at the surface of the sea or dam and breathing through a tube protruding above the surface of the water.
Participants use a diving mask, a snorkel and usually swim fins. When the water is cooler, participants may choose to wear a wetsuit. The participant can observe underwater attractions for extended periods with little effort(Wordpress, 2010:1).? Spelunking or caving is the exploration of caves. This activity often requires mountaineering skills and both bodily flexibility and strength. It is not for the claustrophobic as it frequently takes place in confined spaces far underground (Wordpress, 2010:1).Now that the different types of adventure activities have been identified, it becomes necessary to explore the adventure travel market.   There is as yet little knowledge about adventure tourists, in particular adventure tourists involved in non-physical adventure (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:90). In the next section, an analysis of the combined behaviour of all the individual tourists will be discussed.2.4 ADVENTURE TRAVEL MARKETThroughout this study, the focus so far, has been on adventure tourists as individuals. When looking at the adventure tourism market, the focus shifts to the market as a whole and away from the individual traveller (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:91).According to Swarbrooke et al., (2003:91) there are certain problems that can occur when attempting to present a global picture of the adventure tourism market. These are:* What can be seen as an adventure for one participant can be an everyday event for another. The question that then follows is, how should adventure tourism be defined? One answer is to look at the activity or product available,and to determine if it is being promoted as an adventure.If this is being done, the product can be defined as an adventure even if it is not actually adventurous, per se. The key to adventure tourism is to attempt to keep the quality of the exploration or expedition the same throughout the trip (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:92).
* Sufficient data collection from the industry is also a challenge as the phenomenon of adventure tourism is both relatively new and very complex (therefore making the current research important). Determining the size and scope of the adventure tourism market has so far eluded both the industry and academe due to a lack of empirical research and the lack of consensus regarding a definition of adventure tourism (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:92; Schneider, Vogt & Smith, 2006:3).* Where data is collected, it is usually undertaken by enterprises and the data is often held confidential. Thus, the necessary data cannot always be accessed by academics. When companies do share the information, there is the risk that they could either exaggerate the size of their market, or under-estimate their market (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:92).* Another problem that occurs is that government and industry awareness of adventure tourism is not equally developed around the world.   Where there is a significant amount of adventure tourism, the lack of recognition of this specialised sector may once more lead to data not being collected (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:92).* Even when data is available, there are still problems that occur due to the lack of conformity of data between different countries. This is due to the different countries defining adventure in a different way. Even where there are certain activities that fit into the adventure category, there is still no single definition of adventure tourism that encompasses everything (Schneider et al., 2006:3). Data collection methods are not uniform and even the little data collected relates to different periods (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:92).It can be seen from the above that measuring adventure tourism markets is extremely difficult and that it is important to conduct research in different countries as well as with different product owners, again making this research highly relevant. In the section to follow, the different types of adventure tourism markets will be discussed. Firstly, a market segment overview will be given.2.4.1 Adventure market segmentation overviewSegmentation is the heart of marketing and, traditionally, divides the market according to demographics (age, sex, race, etc.), geography (where tourists come
from), and psychographics (personality and lifestyle). The three basics behind segmentation are:* Market segmentation assumes segment heterogeneity;* New products can be introduced, existing products modified or the product mix changed to capture product heterogeneity through business; and* Business will do so, if the expected return exceeds the cost of any shift in production modification (Schneider et al., 2006:4).However, market segmentation is only of use if it serves some strategic or tactical purpose, such as assisting an organisation better to match its products with the target markets (Schneider et al., 2006:4). Activity-based segmentation adopts an intentional approach to segmenting a market. This approach has proved useful in a number of studies of tourist market segmenting and is very applicable for the adventure tourism industry.   When different tourism products appeal to different types of tourists, they can be seen as activity-based segmentation, as the groups of tourists are defined by their activity preferences, behaviour or visitation patterns. The adventure tourism market is predicted as not homogeneous and different types of activities appeal to different types of adventure tourists (Schneider et al., 2006:4).2.4.1.1 Adventure tourism marketsThe adventure market consists of more than just one aspect. Some of these are discussed below:* Adventure day-trip marketOther than the normal ¡§staying¡¨ vacation, tourists can also participate in adventure activities for the day. They usually take a quick trip to a nearby resort to escape from the daily activities at, or as an exciting addition to, their own resort. Examples of such activities would be making a parachute jump, canopy tours or quad biking for the day (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:106).* The hidden adventure tourism marketSome of the adventure tourism activities are regarded as illegal, or are socially frowned upon. This leads to a problem regarding gathering of data in the adventure tourism field. Hunting, for example, is not recorded or is under-counted in many
countries because of its controversial nature.   Sex tourism is also something that is very frowned upon in most countries, but in Russia for instance, it is of great significance (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:106).* Non-physical adventure tourism marketsThe adventure tourism market is not always physical as there is a non-physical part to it too. Swarbrooke et al. (2003:107) offers four activities that can be adventurous but may be non-physical.o GamblingDestination gambling serves as a main attraction for a number of tourists. Monte Carlo Casino or Sun City, for example, are main attractions and serve as day trip leisure attractions for tourists in the host region. Although gambling tourism mostly focuses on casino gambling, other forms of gambling are also relevant, for instance, horse racing (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:110).o Religious tourismFor those taking part in religious tourism, it represents a personal spiritual adventure. The traditional tourism pilgrimage is still a massive phenomenon in tourism terms. One such example of religious tourism is the pilgrimage from all over South Africa to Moria where the ZCC church assembles over the Easter weekend. Tourists also travel to experience other forms of religion and inspiration.   The annual Hajj to Mecca by the Muslim community is a well-known phenomenon of this kind (Swarbrooke etal., 2003:112; (Szabo, 2009:1)).o Gay tourismBecause the sexual nature of the participants can attract discrimination and even persecution in some places, gay tourism can arguably be seen as a form of adventure. The report in Travel and Tourism Analyst No. 2 (2001 as cited by Swarbrooke et al., 2003:113) states the following concerning gay tourism:¡§Homosexuality remains a taboo in distinct regions of the world.   The tourists are not however discouraged to visit these countries, as they tend to stay in all-inclusive self-contained resorts where they do not have to interact with the local people¡¨ (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:113).o Female romance and sex tourists
It is well known that men travel in search of sex. It is not so well known, however, that women too travel for the same purposes. These women tourists are sometimes categorised as ¡§Shirley Valentines¡¨. They tend to go on a mono-gender holiday, often to the Greek Islands in search of romance with the soi-disant ¡§Greek gods¡¨. Women escape from their domestic reality and engage in romantic escapades with waiters or with other local men. The vacation serves as a personal, escape adventure (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:116).No matter the form it takes, the future of adventure tourism is looking bright as it is still developing and growing (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:117). There is much demand for adventure trips for there are many activities in which tourists have yet to participate. The outbound tourism market is growing. Changes will take place in the adventure tourism market in response to the social, economic and technological change. For instance, there will be a growth in family adventure tourism. Tourists will take more short-break adventure trips and a predicted increase in independent adventure travel will occur. There are however, uncontrollable elements such as climate change and political instability that can have a negative effect in the adventure tourism market, but overall, the outlook is positive (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:117).2.5 CONCLUSIONThe aim of this chapter was to conduct a theoretical analysis of adventure tourism. History indicates that adventure travel has formed a part of people¡¦s lives over a long period. However in the early stages, it was not recognised as adventure tourism as it was first taken as a way of life, or even as a job or career for the participants (Van der Merwe, 2009:221). There are different kinds of adventure tourism such as hedonism, mercenary, adventurer and exploration and pilgrimages (Swarbrooke et al. 2003:40-48).For tourism to be adventure tourism, tourists has to take part in activities where risk is involved and a challenge is perceived, in a natural environment (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:28; Williams & Soutar, 2009:415). Adventure can be categorised into soft adventure (for example, bird watching, and snorkelling) and hard adventure (for example, rock climbing, and white-water rafting). Adventure tourism overlaps with
other forms of tourism, but adventurers have a number of attributes that distinguish them from other tourism markets (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:56). Adventure tourists tend to be young, educated, affluent active thrill seekers who spend significant sums of money in their pursuit of adventures (Williams and Soutar, 2009:415; Active- tourism, 2002:1). Adventure tourism is divided into different markets such as the day trip market, hidden adventure market, and the non-physical adventure tourism markets. This latter segment includes gambling, religious tourism, gay tourism and female romance and sex tourism as sub-categories (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:106- 116).Adventure tourism is definitely a very interesting subject and a field that needs to be explored, as it has so much to offer to the tourist and to the service provider.
CHAPTER 3A LITERATURE ANALYSIS OF TOURIST BEHAVIOUR AND TRAVEL MOTIVES3.1 INTRODUCTIONTourism is an industry that is growing as fast as the technology that is transforming the way people live, play and work (van Harssel, 1994:97). New technologies are helping the development of tourism for people now have more free time to spend in tourism ventures, and the speed of communications has improved tremendously, thus simplifying communication ¡V and the search for new destinations (van Harssel, 1994:97).   Tourists use their free time to participate in certain activities such as travel for adventure. More free time and better communication are, however, not the only reasons tourists participate in tourism activities (Swarbrooke et al., 2003:80). Participants, also choose to participate in the more risky activities to gain further experience, skills and competence in their chosen activity. They also participate for social and psychological benefits as the shared identities and culture of other people enhance the tourism experience (Weed, 2009:226).According to Iso-Ahola, (1999, as cited by Beh & Bruyere, 2007:1464), motivations are understood to be the underlying forces that arouse and direct the behaviour of tourists (adventure tourists). Behaviour is a process of internal psychological factors such as needs, wants and goals, which, to some extent, can generate tension. When experiencing tension, tourists (adventure tourists) will need to find a way to release this tension, and choose to do so in different ways (Beh & Bruyere, 2007:1464).The aim of this chapter is to conduct a literature analysis of tourist travel behaviour and travel motives of adventure tourists. The chapter will address the purchase decision-making process. Thereafter, different motivational theories and models, together with previous research in adventure travel motives, will be reviewed and finally, the chapter will end with conclusions drawn.
3.2 TOURIST BEHAVIOURThe term tourism, in behavioural terms, means to travel away from every day surroundings for a temporary period of at least one night. Tourists search for leisure experiences by interacting with new or different features of the places they choose to visit (Choibamroong, 2006:1). Consumer behaviour isthe process of acquiring and organising information in the direction of a purchase decision, and the use and evaluation of products and services (Moutinho, Ballantyne and Rate, 2011:83).When comparing tourist behaviour and consumer behaviour, there are clear differences between the two subjects, some of which lie in the extended phases that surround tourist activities. Clawson and Knetsch (1966, as cited by Pearce, 2005:9) identified five such phases of tourist activities:1. An anticipation or pre-purchase segmentTourists plan and fantasise about an upcoming travel for months or even years in advance. Consumers might share the anticipation when, for instance, buying a car, but with everyday groceries, this is not the case (Pearce, 2005:9).2. A travel to site segmentThere is no sensible explanation in tourism literature to date for both the travel to the site, and the return travel phases. Tourists, however, look forward to reaching the destination, and the travel alone can form an important part of the total experience (Pearce, 2005:10)3. An on-site experienceTo be on-site where the activity will take place provides an opportunity for tourists to view, feel, hear and sense the place they visit. The deeply personal reactions and, sometimes, the socio-environmental consequences of the tourists¡¦ on-site behaviour are distinctive (Pearce, 2005:10).4. A return travel componentThe pre-travel and post-travel phases are important subcomponents that travellers must take into consideration when planning the expenditure budget of the total trip, as tourists need to travel to and from the destination.5. An extended recall and recollection stageThe last phase is often long-lasting as people recall their tourist experience even years afterwards. The experienced product does not wear out or decay
and improvements to the recollection are made by repeat visits to the site or by gathering more information about the site (Pearce, 2005:10).Tourist behaviour is a part of a very social business as tourism is a people-to-people business in both the consumption and production thereof. Tourists like to share their experiences with others and make joint decisions about the next experience (Pearce, 2005:11). It is important to understand the tourist (consumer¡¦s) behaviour in order to develop specialised tourism products, and to gain adequate knowledge for effective tourism planning and marketing (Choibamroong, 2006:6; Slabbert, 2006:84). One method of understanding tourist behaviour is by understanding the tourist decision- making process that affects tourist behaviour.There are some unique aspects in the tourism buying decision - tourist products are investments without any tangible rate of return; the purchase of the tourism product is often prepared and planned for through savings made over a period. The tourist is willing to invest in an intangible product, with no expectation of material and economic return (Moutinho, 2011:83).Tourist behaviour is influenced by different factors that must be understood, namely:* How tourists perceive destination areas, air travel, travel distances and travel advertising;* How tourists learn to consume and travel;* How tourists make their travel decisions; and* How the personalities of the tourists affect their decision.An important part of tourist behaviour is the decision making process of tourists (Moutinho, 2011:83). According to Alsagof (2007), it is important to understand the tourist decision making process for two reasons: First, planning considerations - all destinations require some form of planning and management, and control of negative impacts, where it may be appropriate to divert tourists or particular activities away from vulnerable areas. In the second place, economic considerations: growth anddevelopment of the tourism industry in a region or corporate growth are dependent on understanding consumer behaviour, particularly through market segmentation strategies. The buying process starts before the actual purchase and
continues long after the purchase (Zainbooks, 2012:1). It is necessary to focus on the whole process as the figure shows that the buyer passes through every stage when deciding to purchase a product.Kinnear, Bernhardt and Krentler (1995:180) described decision-making in tourist behaviour as: ¡§tourist behaviour (that) needs to be seen as a process or series of acts, which can be analysed by means of the Purchase Decision Making Process (hereafter referred to as PDMP), a process describing the process/series of acts an individual tourist goes through trying to decide which product or service to acquire¡¨. The PDMP consists of five steps, namely: problem recognition, information seeking, the evaluation of alternatives, the purchase decision and then post-purchase evaluation. These steps will be discussed next.Figure 3.1: Decision making process (Kinnear et al.,1995)Stage 1: Problem recognitionThe first step is to recognise and identify the problem. There is a difference between the actual state of the buyer and the desired state. A need can be triggered (to have a nature experience or to participate in adventure activities) in different ways. These stimuli may be either internal ¡V one of a person¡¦s normal needs such as hunger or thirst that rises to such a level that it becomes a drive, or external ¡V market-used advertising, in-store displays and even the intentional use of scent or aromas. If the
need is great enough and the consumer has the internal drive to satisfy the need, he will move on to the next step (Zainbooks, 2012:1; Knowthis, 2012:1).Stage 2: Information seekingAfter identifying a need, the tourists (consumers) might need more information. If the need is strong and a product that can satisfy the need is near enough, the consumer might buy it there and then. If not, then the consumer will store the need in his mind or seek information concerning the need. The consumer can gain information from personal sources (friends and family), commercial sources (travel agents, internet, travel magazines, advertising), public sources (mass media) and experiential sources (handling, examining, using the product). A consumer normally receives the most information about a product from commercial sources (like the GO or Getaway magazines), but the most effective sources tend to be personal sources such as family and friends (Zainbooks, 2012:1).Stage 3: Evaluation of alternativesThe tourist (consumer) now has a variety of choices that can fulfil his/her needs. The consumer has different attitudes towards certain brands (ATKV, South Africa National Parks, Sun International), and the individual consumer and the specific buying situation influences the evaluation process. In some cases, the consumer will make use of careful calculations and will use logical thinking, and on other occasions, the consumer does little or no evaluation of the product before buying it on impulse. Consumers sometimes make the buying decision on their own, but sometimes they turn to friends, consumer guides or salespersons for advice (Zainbooks, 2012:1).Stage 4: Purchase decisionDuring the evaluation stage (Stage 3), the tourist (consumer) forms opinions about the brands and forms purchase intentions. The consumer will normally buy the most preferred brand, but there are factors that can come between the original purchase intention and the purchase decision, such as the attitudes of others and the unexpected situational factors. The consumer will make a decision on which tourism product to purchase based on expected income, expected price and expected tourism product benefits. The unexpected events however, can change the original purchase intention (Zainbooks, 2012:1).
Stage 5: Post-purchase evaluationIn the post-purchase evaluation, the tourists (consumers) will reflect upon whether or not the need was satisfied or dissatisfied after the tourism product was bought, and this will then lead to post-purchase behaviour. The relationship between the consumer expectations and the tourism products perceived performance, will determine whether a consumer is satisfied or not with the tourism product. The bigger the gap between the expectation of the tourist (consumer) and the product results, the more dissatisfied the consumer will be (Zainbooks, 2012:1).The PDMP, or in other words ¡§tourist behaviour¡¨, is further influenced by the following aspects known as the factors (See Figure 3.2) influencing PDMP. These aspects are socio-demographical characteristics of individuals, for example, age, gender, level of education, family lifecycle, social class and place of residence; internal or psychological characteristics, for example, motivations, values, personality and lifestyle.; marketing influences, for example, destination image, role of marketing, marketing activities, market segmentation and image building; situational factors, for example, physical surroundings, social surroundings, temporal perspective, task definition and antecedent states.   Each of these factors has different elements as will be discussed below.a) Demographic FactorThe demographic factor that influences tourist behaviour consists of elements based on the demographic information of the tourist. These include age, gender, education, income, race, marital status and household size.o AgeYoung consumers feel more presurised by emotional and social aspects when making decisions, whereas adults and retired persons feel pressure to a lesser extent (Sanz de Acedo Lizarraga, Sanz de Acedo Baquedano and Cardelle-Elwadar 2007:388). The reason why young people may be more affected in this manner is that they lack knowledge and experience in certain areas, they may place little value on the factors that affect the decision, and sometimes they are not aware of the complexity of the decision. Adults and retired people, on the other hand, pay closer
attention to these factors and, only after choosing the appropriate strategies, do they make their decision (Sanz de Acedo Lizarragaet al., 2007:388).Figure 3.2 Tourist decision making process and influencing factors (Kinnear et al., 1995)o GenderAccording to Sanz de Acedo Lizarraga et al., 2007:387), when it comes to a decision, women are more concerned with the uncertainty, doubts and the quality of being dynamic and positive. Women give more value to time and money, and are more concerned about the consequences of their decisions.   Women find their emotions to be more important to them and pay attention to the limitations that the surroundings or a close person put on them.Men, on the other hand, spend more time analysing the information needed to make the decision, and also focus on the goals and the reason for the decision.   Men tend to feel more pressure from the work-related aspects of the decision, but during the
process, men are more motivated (Sanz de Acedo Lizarraga et al., 2007:387).   Men and women both follow the same procedure whem making a decision. Both genders process the information carefully, retrieve the relevant decision-related data from their memories, think about alternatives, predict results, measure the consequences, solve the problem and monitor the decision stages. The difference between genders lies closer to the bahavioural styles or the social roles of men and women (Sanz de Acedo Lizarraga et al., 2007:387).o EducationConsumers with a more formal level of education are more likely to do a thourough search for information before making a purchase decision. Individuals with a lower education level may rate consumer publications and direct mail as important sources of information.   As the level of education increases, the tendency to travel increases and with a higher level of education, of income and of life satisfaction, a tendancy to choose more distant destinations arises.   Parents with a high level of education, have a lower level of influence by their children (Wang, Chen & Chou, 2007:145).o IncomeThe disposable income of the consumers plays an important role when deciding to buy a tourism product. High income earners tend to buy expensive and luxurious travel packages, while low income earners will tend to travel closer to home and for shorter periods of time (Brown, 2012:1).o RaceRacial groups differ in parenting practices and, as such, affect a child¡¦s influence on the parent¡¦s purchasing decision. Young childrens¡¦ development and adjustment are guided by parent-child relational variables, and the shaping factors will be different for white and black families. Children in minority families are likely to have fewer resources available and less freedom of choice, and this in turn affects the level of influence they might have on buying tourist products (Beneke, Silverstone, Woods & Schneider, 2011:3809).
o Marital StatusThe different stages that households progress through, is known as the marital status or family life cycle.   Each stage of the family life cycle reveals different needs for tourism as the families¡¦ taste and choices change, and so different purchase deccions are made.Stage 1: Bachelor stage ¡V Young, single, adult living at homeSingle working men/women with few financial commitments. The focus is on fashion clothes and accessories, sport and leisure products, cars, music. If living independently, the focus is on rent and household furnishings also (Slabbert, 2006:94; Kumar, 2011:1).Stage 2: Honeymooners ¡V Newly married or coupled without childrenThey are better off financially than they are likely to be in the near future with their joined incomes. They have shared roles in decision making and focus on savings, household furnishings, cars, holidays and outings (Slabbert, 2006:94; Kumar, 2011:1).Stage 3: Full nest 1 ¡V Couples with youngest child under 5Household buying is at peak. The liquid assets are low and there is a dissatisfied level of savings and general financial position. The focus is on baby clothes, furniture, economy food and health care products (Slabbert, 2006:94; Kumar, 2011:1).Stage 4: Full nest 2 ¡V Couples with youngest child between 6-11Financial position is improving and a higher portion of wives are able to work or to return to work Advertising has a relatively low influence and the focus is on children¡¦s toys, education products, domestic appliances and a variety of food (Slabbert, 2006:94; Kumar, 2011:1).Stage 5: Full nest 3 ¡V Older couples with dependent children 11-18The financial position is improving further, children start becoming employed.   The focus is on durable goods, better furniture, luxury appliances, cars and hobby items (Slabbert, 2006:94; Kumar, 2011:1).
Stage 6: Empty nest 1 - Older couples, no children at home, head of family still workingChildren leave the home and home ownership is at a peak stage. The financial situation has improved, savings have increased and investments are made. Parents have more leisure time and undertake frequent travels and indulge in luxuries (Slabbert, 2006:94; Kumar, 2011:1).Stage 7: Empty nest 2 ¡V Older couple, no children living at home, head of family retiredThere is a substantial reduction in income. Cheaper holidays are taken, and value¡V for-money goods are bought. Although income is still high, the couple consider selling the house. Thoughts revolve around adequate medical care and health care products (Slabbert, 2006:94; Kumar, 2011:1).Stage 8: Solitary survivor in labour forcePaying attention to the economy of living (Slabbert, 2006:94).Stage 9: Solitary survivor retiredThere is a substantial cut in income, a need for attention and security as well as medical needs. The death of a spouse can occur thus leading to the necessity for a simple pattern of living which is very economical (Slabbert, 2006:94; Kumar, 2011:1).o Household sizeThe number of people in a household have an influence on the decisions made. (Tan & Lee, 2007:281).   When purchases are made for a large family, more needs arise in comparison than when shopping for one person. The person making the decision must consider the needs of the other household members, and large households can be expected to have a wider variety of needs than a small household may have (Inman, Ferraro & Winer, 2004:13).b) Situational FactorThere are different situational influences that can alter a tourists¡¦ perception in the buying process, these are as follows:
o Physical surroundingsInclude location, atmosphere, aromas, sounds, weather and other elements of the physical environment of the destination or product. The decision may be influenced by the physical surrounding in which the decision is made. Even though there is little control over conditions in the physical surorundings, the presentation can be altered according to consumer preference (Albers-Miller, 2012:1; Anic, 2006:734).o Social surroundingsSocial surroundings deals with the interactions with, and characteristics of the other people that are present when a decision is made. This may include people both directly, indirectly and unrelated to the outcome of the decision, for example, friends, family or employees. The consumer often feels pressured to behave in a certain manner in a social setting. When a selection setting is made, it is often a poduct of group input (Albers-Miller, 2012:1; Anic, 2006:735).o Temporal perspectiveTime is an important aspect as it influences a purchase outcome, including the amount of time needed to search, buy and use a product, as well as the physical time of day, year to mention   few.   When there are time constraints involved, it may result in the tourist making a simplistic decision (Albers-Miller, 2012:1, Anic, 2006:736).o Task definitionThe reason for the purchase influences the outcome, and the level of involvement and the amount of emotion is directly related to the purchase reason. The better the consumer can describe the reason for the purchase, the better the seller can assist in the purchase choice (Albers-Miller, 2012:1; Anic, 2006:737).o Antecedent statesThe mood of the buyer plays a role in the purchase whether it is current, momentary or as a result of the state of health. The day-to-day mood of the decision maker influences the interpretation of the candidates (Albers-Miller, 2012:1; Anic, 2006:738).
c) MarketingWhen it comes to the marketing of tourism products, the following elements play a role:o Destination imageA destination image is developed through a set of expectations based on previous experience, word-of-mouth, advertising and common beliefs. Destination image is an individual¡¦s overall perception or total impression of a destination, for example, of South Africa as tourism destination. Controllable attributes include destination product, price, place and promotion, and uncontrollable attributes include personal characteristcs. The destination image is influenced by the attributes of the environment such as atmospheric attributes ¡V landscapes, historical attractions, infrastructure, accommodation and facilities, and service attributes. There is a direct impact on the potencial tourist as the destination image plays a crucial role in the destination selection process, based on the most favourable image (Jobtrust, 2007:1; Echtner& Ritchie, 2003:39).o Role of marketingMarketing activities are developed and directed to plan, promote and sell tourism goods and services that can satisfy the needs of tourists (customers). Marketing information systems are developed to support decision making regarding activities, and consists of people, equipment and procedures designed to gather, sort, analyse,evaluate and distribute the information needed to make educated decisions (Ismail, 2011:175).o Activities of marketingMarketing has various activities, and include everything needed to get the tourism product from the drawingboard to the tourist who can make use of it. The tourism product is designed to be desirable to tourists by means of marketing research and pricing. The product is promoted by using public relations, advertising and marketing communications so potential tourists will know of it. A price for the tourist product must be set, and the potential tourists must be informed of its availability (Bellis, 2012:1).o Market segmentationMarket segementation is the process of identifyning types of tourists and classifying them into groups or market segments. In a market segment, suppliers of tourism
products are able to develop and deliver their products more effectively and marketers can establish common reasons behind the purchase of tourism products (Page & Connell, 2006:79). Segmentation can be categorised as follow:Psychographic segmentation:Segmentation is done based on lifestyle factors or activities, interests, attitudes and opinions. The elements can help to build a picture of common purchasing behaviour and certain types of individuals can be targeted, knowing that the tourists may be more receptive than the population in general (Page & Connell, 2006:80).Demographic Segmentation:The market is divided into groups based on variables such as age, gender, family size, family life cycle, income, occupation, education, religion, race, generation and nationality. Demographic segmentation is a common base for segmentation as tourists¡¦ needs, wants and usage rates often reflect their demographic variables (Armstrong & Kotler, 2005:188).Socio-economic segmentation:Dividing the market into the different social classes, such as upper class, middle class, lower class, skilled working class, or subsistence level (Dinbar & McDonald,1995:55).o Image buildingThe image of a tourist product and destination plays an important role when a tourist chooses a holiday destination. A tourist¡¦s preference, motivation and behaviour towards a tourism product is critically important. The image the consumers have of the destination is based on previous experiences, learning, emotions and perceptions. There are two levels in which image of tourism products and destinations can be identified:1. Organic image: the information that has not been directed by advertising or promotion of a tourism product or destination. This form of information is garnered from television coverage, geography and history books, news papers, the internet and word-of-mouth about the area.
2. Induce image: formed by deliberate portrayal and promotion by various organisations involved in tourism, for example, Dracula tourism in Transylvania(Southpacifictourism, 2005:1; Croy, 2004:5; Banyai, 2009:4).d) Internal/Psychological FactorsInternal factors occur within the tourist, and these are affected by the demographics of the tourist, and by who the tourist is (Calhoun, 2011:1). These factors consist of motivation, perception, learning, personality and attitude.o MotivationMotivation is a state of need that leads the individual towards certain types of action that may lead to satisfaction. Thus, motivation can be seen as the starting point of the decision making process The term motivation is often merely used to descibe the purpose of a holiday (Page & Connell, 2006:63; Yolal, Etinal & Uysal, 2009:278). More attention will be given under section 3.3 concerning travel motives as this forms an important part of the study.There are seven perspectives on tourist motivation based on Dann (1981, as cited by Page & Connell, 2006:69):1. Travel as a response to what is lacking, yet desired ¡V The tourist have a desire for something new or different that cannot be found in the individual¡¦s home environment.2. Destination ¡§pull¡¦ in response to motivational ¡§push¡¨ ¡V The distinction between the needs, wants and desires (push factors) of the individual tourist and how they are shaped by the perceptions of the destinations (pull factors).3. Motivation as fantasy ¡V The tourists may want to travel to participate in activities or behaviour that is not culturally acceptable in their home surroundings, for example, gambling, drugs or prostitution. Such activities are illegal in most countries - but not all - and the desire to travel to satisfy these motivations can arise.4. Motivation as classified purpose ¡V The nature or purpose of the trip can be motivation to travel of itself, for example, visiting friends and family or the opportunity to engage in specific leisure activities.
5. Motivational and tourist experiences ¡V Tourism often involves traveling to a place not visited before. Tourists are motivated to travel by what they expect to experience in contrast to the experiences available in their home area.6. Motivation as auto-definition and meaning ¡V The ways in which tourists define their situaton and respond to them may provide a better understanding of tourist motivation. This approach is in contrast with simply observing behaviour as a means to explain tourist motivation (Page & Connell, 2006:69).Motivation will be discussed thoroughly in the next section.o PerceptionPerception is how a person interprets, and makes sense of, the world around him. This is done through stimuli that affect the different senses such as sight, hearing, touch, smell and taste. The combination of the senses also make a difference in how the product is interpreted. Because marketers use different types of stimuli to try and make their products more attractive, consumers filter out information based on relevance. This process is called selective perception (Tanner and Raymond, (2012:1).o LearningPeople learn when they act. People change their behaviour after they gain information or experience about a product. According to theorists, most human behaviour is learned, and learning occurs through the interplay of drives, stimuli, cues, responses and reinforcement (Zainbooks, 2012:1; Tanner & Raymond, 2012:1).o PersonalityEach consumer has their own personality that influences their buying behaviour. The unique psychological characteristics that lead to relatively consistent and lasting responses to an individual¡¦s environment is refered to as personality. There are certain characteristics that describe a consumer¡¦s personality, such as self- confidence, dominance, sociability, autonomy and aggressiveness. Personality may be useful, for instance, when analysing consumer behaviour for a certain product or band choice, for example, adventure tourism. Marketers often use the basic self- concept theory that a consumer¡¦s possessions reflect their identities. The marketer must first understand the relationship between consumer self-concept and possessions (Zainbooks, 2012:1).
o AttitudesBeliefs and attitudes are acquired by doing and learning, and these, in turn, influence the consumer¡¦s buying behaviour. Belief is a descriptive thought that a consumer has about something. Buying behaviour differs from product to product, and more complex decisions usually involve more buyer deliberation and more buying participants.e) External/Social FactorsThe external or social factors that influence the tourists¡¦ buying decision, are the things in the surroundings of the tourists (Calhoun, 2011:1) and can include the following:o CultureCulture is the most basic cause of a tourist¡¦s (consumer¡¦s) wants and behaviour. Human behaviour, along with basic values, perceptions and wants, is learned from family and other important institutions while growing up. A person learnsthe following values: achievement and success, activity and involvement, efficiency and practicality, progress, material comfort, individualism, freedom, humanitarianism, youthfulness, and attitudes to fitness and health. Every group has a culture and cultural influences on buying behaviour are different from country to country. Each culture contains smaller subcultures that have shared value systems based on common experiences and situations. Subcultures include nationalities, religions, racial groups and geographic regions (Zainbooks, 2012:1).o Social ClassAccording to Lumsdon (1997:42), social class, assessed primarily by occupation and level of income, can be considered to be one of the most important external factors that influence the purchase decision making process. Throughout social research, social class is used to segment the consumer population and is now commonly established by occupational grading schemes. (Page and Connell, 2006:78).   People in jobs of similar social and economic status are categorised as follow:
Table 3.1: Social classSocial ClassAUpper	middle	class:	higher	managerialadministrative or profesisonalBMiddle class: middles to senior management,up-and-coming professionalsC1Lower middle  class:  junior  management,supervisory, secretarial, and clerical gradesC2Skilled working class: manual tradesDWorking class: semi and unskilled workersEUnemployed/state	dependant:	Pensionersand widows and those on the breadline, using social security and state benefitsSource: (Page and Connell, 2006:78)Tourism is price elastic, meaning that tourists might start looking for cheaper alternatives when there are small price increases. The incomes of tourists are generally synonymous with their occupational group, and these classification have an influence on tourism patterns. When comparing the unskilled group to the professional occupants, for example, it is found that the unskilled group has an increase in television viewing, a decline of library membership and book reading, a decline in holiday-making as well as for sport participation and countryside recreation. The professional group, on the other hand, enjoys a more varied and active range of leisure activities.Aspects of occupational grouping influence tourism, but it must be kept in mind that a young professional worker with a family may have less disposable income than, for instance, a working couple in the skilled manual class who has no dependants. The nature and type of holiday the tourists decide to undertake is affected by the subjective judgments associated with upper, middle and working classes (Page & Connell, 2006:78). The lack of balance among the social groups is clearer in the type of holiday taken than it is in the participation rates. The AB groups are more likely to take overseas holidays than are the DE groups, despite the cheap package
deals that have become widely available. Higher status consumers travel independently more often and the AB groups dominate the short-break market (Page & Connell, 2006:79).o GroupsTourist behaviour can be influenced by small groups. A group that has a direct influence, and to which a person belongs, is called a membership group. Reference groups in contrast, serve as a direct or indirect points of comparison or reference in forming a person¡¦s attitude or behaviour. People can be influenced by a reference group they do not belong to, and marketers try to identify the reference groups of their target markets as they expose a person to new behaviours and lifestyles, and influence a person¡¦s attitude and self concept. Reference groups also create pressure on a person to conform, and so they may affect the choice of product and brand. Marketers try to determine how to reach the opinion leader of a group as thisperson may have special skills, knowledge, personality and other characteristics to influence other group members. The importance of group influence varies accross products and brands and is strongest when the product is visible to others whom the buyer respects (Zainbooks, 2012:1).Now that there is a better understanding of the purchase decision-making process of the tourist, the motivation to buy the tourism product or what drives tourist to make a desition will be explored in the section to follow.3.3 THEORIES OF MOTIVATIONThere exist different motivation theories to determine how, what and why a tourist can be motivated to travel and buy an adventure product. In the section to follow, the theories will be discussed, as well as previous research regarding travel motives of tourists.Past research (Bonera, 2008: Kim et al., 2006: Van der Merwe, Slabbert & Saayman, 2009) has shown that authors found motivation to play a major role in tourists¡¦ behaviour. The concept of need is central to most content theories. To understand human travel motivation, it is first necessary to understand what needs tourists may have, as needs could be seen as the force behind motivated behaviour (Pizam & Mansfeld, 1999:7). Murphy (1985), as cited by Bonera (2008:7), claims that
motivation is an essential element for tourism development because, without interest or a need to travel, tourism would not exist.In order to provide tourists with a positive tourism experience and to assist with tourism product development, one of the most important aspects to be determined is why tourists travel. That is, to determine the travel motives of tourists to different tourism destinations (Beh & Bruyere, 2007:1464). Banerjea (2010:1) adds to this and states that it is important to know why tourists travel to participate in tourism activities (adventure activities) as this plays an important role in predicting future travel patterns. According to Pearce, Morrison and Rutledge (1998, as cited by Banerjea, 2010:1), tourist motivation can be defined as:the global integrating network of biological and cultural forces that gives value and direction to travel choices, behaviour and experience.Therefore, to have a reason to travel to a specific destination, this occurs when an individual has a need that needs to be satisfied (Encarta, 2009:1; Goossens, 200:302).When tourists choose where they want to go, it is referred to as destination-related travel motives and implies that tourists compare different destinations, facilities, the costs involved and then decide where they want to go (Foster, 1985:32). Added to this research, Kruger and Saayman (2010:93) additionally indicated that by determining the motives why tourists travel, more effective marketing can be done and, when planning marketing strategies, more specific factors can be kept in mind that can lead to a competitive advantage in the tourism market sector (Van der Merwe, Slabbert & Saayman, 2009:168). This will benefit marketers of tourism products in a number of ways. Firstly, it assists in market segmentation. Secondly, it enables an evaluation of the quality of service. Thirdly, it aids product development. Fourthly, it allows for image development, and finally, it enables accurately targeted promotional activities (Kruger & Saayman, 2010:93). Therefore, it is important to understand the travelmotivations of the tourists, in this case adventure tourists, to be successfully able to operate tourism business (Fodness, 1994 as cited by Kruger & Saayman, 2010:93; Pan & Ryan, 2007:288).
Over the years, a number of theories regarding motivation were developed by researchers such as Maslow (1943), Iso-Ahola (1989) and by Murry, Plog, and Crompton (1979).These theories will be examined next.3.3.1 Maslow¡¦s Hierarchy of Needs modelThe Hierarchy of Needs model was developed by Abraham Maslow between 1940 and 1950 and it remains applicable even today. The model assists in understandinghuman motivation, in showing how different stages of needs must be fulfilled before a higher level of need can be attempted.Figure 3.3 Maslow¡¦s Hierarchy of Needs(Chapman, 2001:1)Maslow argued that if the psychological, safety and belonging needs, the lower needs on the hierarchy, are fulfilled, then the individual will feel motivated to fill the next higher level of needs, that is, ¡¥esteem¡¦ and ¡¥self-actualisation¡¦ as these
needsthen become more relevant and urgent (Banerjea, 2010:1; Woodside & Martin, 2006:15). However, although the basic needs do not need to be fulfilled completely before the next level or need arises, they still require fulfilment at some stage (Woodside & Martin, 2006:15; Chapman, 2001:1). Maslow later argued that ¡¥a more realistic description of the hierarchy would be in terms of decreasing percentages of satisfaction as one proceeds up the hierarchy of prepotency¡¦ (Maslow 1940, as cited by Woodside & Martin, 2006:15, Cherry, 2011:1). Although Maslow¡¦s theory was intended for use in clinical psychology, the model can be applicable to other fields including marketing and tourism, and this includes adventure tourism (Pizam & Mansfield, 1999:8).Pearce (1982), as cited by Woodside and Martin (2006:15), applied the hierarchy to tourist motivation and behaviour to analyse tourists¡¦ travel experiences. Their findings are as follows:* Biological and Physiological needs are the basic needs vital for human survival and include air, food, drink, shelter, warmth, sleep and sex, to name but a few. Maslow believed that all other needs are secondary until these psychological needs are met;* Safety needs include protection from the elements, the need for security, order and law, limits and stability. They are important for survival but are not vital needs and are not as predominant as the psychological needs;* Belongingness, love and affection. Friendships, romantic attachments and families help fulfil this need for companionship and acceptance.   Involvement in social, community and religious groups also help meet this need;* Esteem needs includes self-esteem, achievement, mastery, independence, status, dominance, prestige, managerial responsibility, and many others. These needs become increasingly important only when the previous stages of needs are met.* Self-actualisation needs include elements such as realising personal potential, self-fulfilment, seeking personal growth and peak experiences. At this level, people tend to become less  concerned about the opinions of others about
themselves and become more interested in fulfilling their potential (Woodside & Martin, 2006:15; Cherry, 2011:1).Maslow is of the opinion that the needs of a person must be satisfied, or sufficiently satisfied, in the ascending order shown in Figure 3.1. Levels 1 to 4 are deficiency motivators and level 5 is a growthmotivator. It may then be asked where it is that, doing something just for fun (tourism) fits into the model? The following addresses this question:1. Biological ¡V While participating in adventure activities, the health and fitness of the participant can be improved, and the mind and body can be invigorated.2. Safety ¡V Order and structure needs can be met by the rules that accompany a certain activity, especially when there are risks involved. Safety gear may need to be worn and certain guidelines will need to be followed.3. Belongingness ¡V When participating in team sports or activities, relationships are formed with other team members as the participants work together to accomplish the challenge.4. Esteem ¡VWhile participating in an adventure activity, new skills are learned and, when it is a group activity, a sense of challenge is felt. Therefore achievements can be reached and a sense of recognition can be gained after completion.5. Self-actualisation drivers ¡V Challenges help the participant to have new experiences, to develop a love for the activity or nature and this, in itself, is motivation enough (Chapman, 2001:1).Swarbrooke and Homer (2007:54) discuss a leisure motivation scale as proposed by Beard and Raghob (1983).   On this scale, motivations are clarified into four types based on the work of Maslow, as follows:Type 1:Intellectual component include mental activities such as learning, exploring, discovery, thought and imagery. This sector assesses the extent to which individuals engage in leisure activities.
Type 2:Social component assesses the extent to which tourists engage in the leisure activities for social reasons. There are two basics needs ¡V the need for friendship and inter-personal relationships, and the need for esteem from others.Type 3:Competence-mastery component looks at the extent to which individuals engage in leisure activities. Here the need is to achieve, to master, challenge and compete in activities that are usually physical in nature. This is where the adventure tourist will fit in.Type 4:Stimulus-avoidance component assesses the desire to escape and get away from the normal, yet over-stimulating life situations that some individuals seek to avoid (Swarbrooke and Homer, 2007:54).Pearce, as cited by Woodside and Martin, (2006:156), developed the opinion that tourists are attracted to holiday destinations because of the possibility of fulfilling self- actualisation, love and belongingness and physiological needs, in that order of importance.3.3.2 Iso-Ahola motivation modelIso-Ahola (1989) model of motivation is illustrated in Figure 3.4.		Figure 3.4: Iso-Ahola Motivation model (Saayman, 2006:26)
From Figure 3.4, the Iso-Ahola motivation model, four dimensions may be identified. These dimensions are:1. personal escape - to get away from the normal environment, to have a change in pace from the everyday life, to brighten a bad mood;2. interpersonal escape - to avoid annoying people, to get away from a stressful social environment, to avoid interactions with vexatious others;3. personal rewards - to tell others about personal experiences, to feel good about one¡¦s self, to personally experience new things; and4. Interpersonal rewards - to be with people of similar interests, to bring friends/family closer and to meet new people.Iso-Ahola and Mannell (1987) developed the two-dimensional tourist motivation model, based on their understanding of leisure studies (Woodside & Martin, 2006:21). Their model offers that two motivational forces simultaneously influence an individual¡¦s leisure or tourist behaviour. This means that the psychological benefits of recreational travel arise from the interaction between two forces, escape from routine and stressful environments, and seeking recreational opportunities for certain psychological rewards. This also means that tourists are willing or motivated to seek leisure or tourist activities in order to leave behind both the personal and/or interpersonal problems of everyday life, and by so doing, obtain personal and/or interpersonal rewards (Woodside & Martin, 2006:21).In the first quadrant, the person seeks to escape the interpersonal environment such as family and group situations. The desire to seek personal rewards is represented in quadrant two, and consists of self-determination, a sense of competence or mastery, challenge, learning, exploration and relaxation. Interpersonal rewards arise from social interaction. In quadrant three, the need to escape the personal environment, for instance, to flee personal problems and to seek relief from difficulties is represented. The last quadrant, number four, represents the desire to escape from the everyday environment (Saayman, 2006:26: Woodside & Martin, 2006:21).According to Mannell and Iso-Ahola (1987, as cited by Woodside & Martin, 2006:22), tourism will represent a more escape-orientated, rather than a seeking-oriented
activity, for most people under most circumstances. Tourists with escape-motivated vacations take vacations to avoid their over-, or under-stimulating life situations. Tourists who escape from over-stimulation participate in fewer activities during their vacation and do not find seeking intrinsic rewards as important as do tourists who escape from under-stimulation.3.3.3 The Push and Pull TheoryThe ¡¥push and pull¡¦ framework is considered suitable to examine the motivations underlying visitation and tourist behaviour (Kay, 2003:608). Crompton (as cited by Kay, 2003:608), identified nine reasons or motives why tourists travel. Seven of these are socio-psychological, or ¡§push¡¨ motives, and two are cultural or ¡§pull¡¨ motives, such as novelty and education.Push factors refer to the forces that influence a tourist¡¦s decision to take a vacation, for example, to escape the normal living and working environment, seeking to relax and participate in hobbies or just for the prestige thereof. Pull factors refer to those factors that influence the tourist about the specific destination chosen. These factors include culture and history, ease of travel or the budget available (Kim, Borges & Chon, 2003, as cited by Kay, 2003:608).Motivations* Escape* Rest & relaxation* Self-esteem* Prestige* Health & Fitness* Adventure* Social interaction* Benefits* InterestsFigure 3.5 Push and Pull Theory (Adapted from Crompton, 1979).
3.3.4 Plog¡¦s Allocentrism/Psychocentrism ModelPlog developed the influential allocentrism/psychocentrism model based on his workwith the airline industry. Plog (as cited by Woodside & Martin, 2006:22) was asked to answer the question of why a large percentage of the American population of the time chose not to fly, and then to determine what could be done to turn the non-flyers into flyers. Plog conducted one-on-one interviews with non-flyers and found that they shared common personality traits. Plog recorded the following:* People were territory bound, meaning they had a tendency to have travelled less throughout their lifetime.* People had generalised anxieties, such as a strong feeling of insecurity in daily life.* Finally, Plog found that people had a sense of powerlessness. They felt as though they had had little control over fortunes and misfortunes throughout their lifetime (Woodside & Martin, 2006:22).These tendencies were defined by Plog as ¡§psychocentrism¡¨, and accordingly the non-flyers were described as ¡§psychocentrics¡¨. Further research on the issue revealed that a tendency towards ¡§allocentrism¡¨ exists on the other end of the scale from ¡§psychocentrism¡¨. People classified as ¡§allocentric¡¨ are said to be adventurous and self-assured (Woodside & Martin, 2006:22).From the above discussions, it will be realised that knowledge of the motivations of tourists to travel is very important and has, over the years, been researched extensively. Motivation is the main influence for tourism demand patterns (Gilbert, 1991, as cited by Bonera, 2008:7). Motivation is what pushes a person to travel, and includes both the conscious and unconscious aspects together with stable and with transitional needs. Tourist motivation can be either positive or negative. The tourist may be looking for something to obtain, or could just be trying to avoid an unwanted situation (Bonera, 2008:7).3.3.5 Sunlust TheoryGray (1970) has identified wanderlust and sunlust as two reasons for pleasure travel (Hallab, 1999:40). Sunlust is a term associated with sun, sand, sea and sex, and the purpose is to seek different or better services than those found at the vacation
destination (Hotelmule, 2011:1). Wanderlust is the desire to leave the familiar surroundings and discover new and different destinations and cultures (Hallab, 1999:40).Some of the characteristics of the wanderlust tourists include that they may visit several countries and are more interested in foreign travel. Travel in itself is an essential component throughout the visit. Educational programs usually draw their attention. Staged-artificial physical characteristics, is of interest to wanderlust tourists, and climate is of less importance. Wanderlust tourists search for different cultures, institutions and cuisine that is authentic to the area (Hallab, 1999:41).Sunlust enthusiasts only visit one country at a time and are more interested in domestic travel. After reaching the desired destination, sunlust tourists find further travelling as a minor component.Sunlust tourists are either interested in rest and relaxation, or they want to be extremely active. Climate is important to Sunlust tourists as they are interested in nature made attributes. Sunlust tourists desire domestic services and lodging facilities (Hallab, 1999:41)3.3.6 Herzberg Two factor theory of motivationHerzberg proposed a two-factor theory for motivation. This theory is also known as the motivator-hygiene theory, and is developed from research into occupational motivation. Herzberg foundthatsome job factors result in satisfaction,andother job- factors prevent dissatisfaction. No satisfaction is the opposite of satisfaction, and no dissatisfaction is the opposite of dissatisfaction (MSG, 2011:1). The following figure illustrates Herzberg¡¦s view of satisfaction and dissatisfaction:	Figure 3.6: Herzberg¡¦s two factor theory of motivation
Hygiene factors do not actually motivate people but will lead to feelings of dissatisfaction if the factor isnot present or inadequate. Motivators on the other hand, are the thing that motivates the individual, but will not lead to any discomfort or dissatisfaction if not present (Raj &Morpeth, 2007:42).Some of the hygiene factors may cause de-motivation and dissatisfaction. The physical conditions experienced during travel, for example, can be daunting for some, but others may see it as part of the experience that can offer anopportunity forpersonal growth, as well as development of survival skills (Raj &Morpeth, 2007:43).In the above, the different motivational theories identify and explain why tourists make trips and what it is that they seek from the destination or activity (Kruger & Saayman, 2009:58).   A basis for studies on travel motives is provided by the above, and this is a helpful aid in determining why tourists travel to participate in adventure activities (Kruger & Saayman, 2009:59). In the next section, previous research regarding travel motives will be compared to determine recorded similarities and differences in the travel motives of adventure tourists.3.4 PREVIOUS RESEARCH REGARDING TRAVEL MOTIVES OF ADVENTURE TOURISTSWhen reviewing the literature on travel motives, researchers have determined that there are different motives to travel in different settings, and to different destinations. Tourists differ in the way they view the world, their approach towards a destinations can be unconventional and their needs are different (Pearce, 2011:59). It will be meaningful to determine why adventure tourists travel by comparing different research studies and finding similarities in order to see if their motives are homogeneous (Chang, 2006:1225).Pearce (2011:59) argues that there are fourteen core factors indicating that travel motives were built on items of interest. These include the following:
Novelty, escape/relax, relationship, strengthening, autonomy, seeking nature, self- development through involvement with hosts or the site, stimulation, self- development of a personal kind, relationship security, self-actualisation, isolation, nostalgia, romance and recognition.Pizam and Mansfeld (1999:12) found that motives for tourists could include looking for adventure; discovering new cultures as a contrast to the regular daily habits; the budget spent on the holiday; the importance attached to nature and authenticity; and seeking relaxation, sun, sand and sea.Decrop (2006:83) claimed that in addition to the basic sequential and spatial escape, there are a few more specific motives. These motives can be grouped into six categories:* Discover new things and acquire knowledge: A well-defined goal is set, for example, visiting sites that are historically and currently important. The Voortrekker Monument in South Africa is an example of a destination of historical importance.* Rest and relaxation: Attempt to break free from routine and eliminate stress.* Share in social experiences: A tourist traveling alone does not mean he/she undertakes the trip in solitude, as there is a need for social interaction that can be filled away from the home environment.* Exciting activities and having fun: To experience fun and excitement while participating in leisure or adventure activities, as the fantasy of the adventure help to overcome the boring and meaningless everyday life activities.* Personal values: May include prestige, richness and knowledge, in order to impress others. Some tourists seek to discover their heritage roots.* Authentic environment: Traveling to places not yet corrupted by vacationers, for example, excluded beeches.Lee and Crompton (1992:732) determined that marine destinations could provide satisfaction for tourists desires such as the desire for novelty, arousal or stimulation. Tourists may seek a more active experience through water-based activities, than just the passive sightseeing cruise experience (Morgan, Moo & Mansell, 2005:74).
Participants in rock climbing indicated that they seek general sensation, thrill, adventure and experience (Levenson, 1990:1075). Six motives were identified by McIntyre (1992:66), recognition, creativity, physical setting, challenge, escape and control.According to Swarbrooke et al., (2003:7), adventure tourists have specific motives of their own. These motivations are listed in Table 3.3.Table 3.2: Adventure tourists travel motivatesThrillAdrenalineExcitementFearJourneyRoughing itChallengeUltimateElationTerrorExpeditionAwe inspiringRiskConquerSuccessDaring(Swarbrooke et al., 2003:7)From Table 3.2, it can be seen that adventure tourists have a wide range of motives to participate in adventure activities, and no tourists need share the same motivation.Table 3.3 gives a summary of research on travel motives of adventure tourists from various researchers.Table 3.3 Previous adventure researchResearch ArticleMotivesAdventure tourist and adventure sports injury: The New Zealand Experience ¡V Bentley, Page & Macky (2006)- Risk- Excitement- Tranquillity- Tested personally- Explore- Personal challengeAdventure tourists on water: Linking expectations, affect, achievement and enjoyment to the sports tourism adventure ¡V Morgan, Moore & Mansell (2005)- Flow experience- Intrinsic rewards- Competence- FunClassification of adventure travellers: Behaviour, decision making, and target markets ¡V Sung (2004)- Importance- Interest- Pleasure
- Risk- ExperienceAn exploration of motivation among scuba divers inNorth Central Florida ¡V Meyer, Thapa, Pennington- Grey (2002)- Learning- Escape- Social interaction- Stature- Personal challengeMountaineering adventure tourists: a conceptual framework for research ¡V Pomfret (2004)- Escape- Social recognition- Socialisation- Self-esteem- NoveltyMotives of the action adventure tourist - McCartney (2005)- Enjoy- Getaway- Challenge- Competitive- Self-testing- ExerciseFrom the research listed in Table 3.3, it can be seen that there are not many articles specifically concerned with the motives of adventure tourists, but a few will be highlighted. Bentley et al. (2006) studied adventure tourism and adventure sports injury in New Zealand, and identified six factors that motivated adventure tourists to participate in the adventure activities: risk, excitement, tranquillity, tested personally explore and personal challenge. Morgan et al. (2005), studied adventure tourists on water, and found the following aspects as motives: flow experience, intrinsic rewards, competence and fun. Sung (2004) identified five motives in her attempt to classify adventure travellers: importance, interest, pleasure, risk and experience. While exploring the motivations of scuba divers, Meyer et al. (2002), identified learning, escape, social interaction, stature and personal challenge as motives to participate in the adventure activities. Pomfret (2004) studied mountain adventure tourists and found the following as motives: escape, social recognition, socialisation, self-esteem and novelty.   McCartney (2005) explored the motives of the action adventure tourist and found that their motives included enjoyment, get away, challenge, competitive, self-testing and exercise.It can be seen that escape (under whatever name) and challenge (again, under a number of pseudonyms) are some of the important motives for adventure tourists to
travel and participate in adventure activities. These are followed by having fun, to have social interaction and to gain experience.As Swarbrooke et al. (2003:69) illustrates, there are a definite reasons adventure tourists decide to participate in adventure activities. Adventure tourism has benefits. Tourists discover new places and have increased sensual growth and educational opportunities. The activity is fun and exciting with better travel opportunities integrated. There is an opportunity for outdoor recreation and activity participation. Participants¡¦ interpretation of the environment and culture improves and the adventure tourists return to nature where there is a carefree setting. They have the opportunity to interact with people and the environment. Participants have improved awareness of their physical fitness and health as well as their mental and/or physical stimulation.Non-adventure tourists with similar profiles travel to the same destinations, but their motives are quite different (Kruger & Saayman, 2009:61). The decision process in individuals is started by motivation (Yolal et al., 2009:278).   When the unique motives of the adventure tourist is understood, tailor-made packages can be developed to suite the specific market segment. The adventure tourism provider can mediate more efficiently during the different stages of the decision-making process, which can result in attracting more visitors, longer stays by the visitors, increase in enjoyment and changing in behaviours (Yolal et al., 2009:278; Crompton & McKay, 1997:426).From the above, the conclusion can be drawn that adventure tourists have different motives, such as challenge, risk and excitement, when travelling to participate in adventure activities than do tourists in general. In Chapter 4, the results of questionnaires given to adventure tourists will be analysed and compared to the above.3.5 CONCLUSIONThe aim of this chapter was to analyse travel behaviour and travel motives of tourists, specifically, adventure tourists. It is important to understand the motives of
adventure tourists as motives are the underlying forces that arouse and direct their behaviour (Iso-Ahola, 1999 as cited by Beh & Bruyere, 2007:1464).The differences between consumer behaviour and tourist behaviour lies in the extended phases that surround tourist activities and Clawson and Knetsch (1966, as cited by Pearce, 2005:9) identified five phases: Anticipation or pre-purchase; travel to site segment; on-site experience; return travel component; extended recall and recollection stage. The tourists behaviour can also be influenced by different factors, and the most important part of the tourists¡¦ behaviour is the decision making process. The five stages in the decision making process include the stages of problem recognition, information seeking, evaluation of alternatives, purchase decision and post purchase evaluation. The factors that influence the purchase decision-making process are demographic factors; situational factors; marketing; internal or psychological factors and external or social factors.There exist different motivation theories to help determine how, what and why a tourist can be motivated to participate in adventure tourism. These theories include Maslow¡¦s hierarchy of needs model, Iso-Ahola motivation model, the push and pull theory, and Plog¡¦s allocentrism/Psychocentrism model.When looking at literature about adventure tourists¡¦ travel motives, it is found that there are common motives identified such as escape, novelty, challenge, socialising, relaxation and self-actualisation (Pearce, 2011:59; Pizam & Mansfeld, 1999:12; Decrop, 2006:83; Lee & Crompton, 1992:732).Swarbrooke et al. (2003:7), lists specific travel motives of adventure tourists: thrill, fear, challenge, terror, risk, daring, adrenaline, journey, ultimate, expedition, conquer, excitement, roughing it, elation, awe-inspiring and success. After comparing the literature research with previous research studies, it is found that escape, challenge, fun, social interaction and experience are among the important motives for adventure travellers.
     CHAPTER 4 EMPIRICAL RESULTS4.1 INTRODUCTIONThe main aim of this research is to determine the travel motives of adventure tourists to Magoebaskloof adventures. Knowing why tourists travel to participate in adventure activities can lead to more effective marketing that, in turn, can lead to a competitive advantage (Kruger & Saayman, 2010:93).   The purpose of this chapter is to record the statistical analyses of the collected data, and to make recommendations based on the findings of the research. In this chapter, these results will be discussed. Firstly, the profile of the adventure tourists will be examined. Secondly a factor analysis is conducted to determine the travel motives of the participants while finally, conclusions from the main findings will be given.The chapter that follows is divided into two sections.* In section A, the demographic profile of adventure tourists will be discussed: while* In section B, the travel motives of adventure tourists will determined using a factor analysis.The analysed data will subsequently be discussed better to understand the results. Findings will be discussed in the conclusion.SECTION A4.2 DEMOGRAPHIC RESULTSIn this section of the chapter, the results from the data received from respondents will be discussed. This will include the following: age, language, marital status, province of origin and other demographic details.
4.2.1 Home LanguageFigure 4.1: Home LanguageAs can be seen in Figure 4.1, the largest percentage of the respondents is English speaking (51%). As might be expected in South Africa, this group is followed closely by Afrikaans-speaking respondents (45%) with the remaining 4% made up of other languages. From the results, it is clear that the two main language categories are English- and Afrikaans-speaking respondents.4.2.2 AgeThe ages of participants ranges from 15 years to 61 years of age. The age category between 21-30 years represents 49% of the participants, the age category 31-40 represents 29% and the age category 41-50 represents a further 9%.   Participants in the age category 51-60 years and 61 years and older represent only 5% and 4%,respectively, of the respondents.	The average age of the adventure tourist is 33years. Research conducted by William and Soutar (2009:415) agree with this and showed that adventure tourists tend to be younger than non-adventure tourists are. Research conducted of visitors to South African National Parks showed that the average age of visitors was 45 years of age (Kruger & Saayman, 2009:97), thereby showing that adventure tourists are younger than national park visitors are including wildlife tourists and nature-based tourists (Zaltzman, 2010:1).
Figure 4.2: Age groups4.2.3 GenderFigure 4.3: GenderAs can be seen from the above (Figure 4.3), the majority of the participants were male making up 56% of the total and the remainder (44%) of the participants were female. This result corresponds with those of Sung (2004:349) that found that close to 68% of the adventure travellers in the U.S. were men.
4.2.4 Marital StatusFigure 4.4 shows that 48% of the participants are married and 45% are not married. Six (6) percent of participants live together and only 1% of participants are divorced. Geckogo (2010:9) found in the study on adventure travellers on a once-in-a-lifetime trip, that 41% of respondents were married.Figure 4.4: Marital status4.2.5 Country of Residence (If outside RSA)As can be seen in the above, 97% of participants are residents of South Africa, with2% from the United States of America and a further 1% from Germany.	his is to beexpected as the product is based in South Africa with a focus on domestic tourists.
Figure 4.5: Country of residence4.2.6 Province of ResidenceFigure 4.6: Province of residenceFigure 4.6 indicates that 50% of participants live in Limpopo and 39% live inGauteng.	The North West represents 3% of participants and KwaZulu-Natal,Western Cape and Northern Cape represents 2% each, respectively.   Participants
from the Eastern Cape make up 1% of the respondents while Mpumalanga and Free State together formed 1%. It is, however, important to state that the research site falls within the boundaries of the Limpopo Province and this may well contribute to the high percentage of respondents from this province.4.2.7 Highest Level of EducationThe graph below illustrates the level of education of participants.	Thirty-one (31) percent   of   participants   have   a   diploma   or   degree,   30%   of   participants   arematriculates and 19% have professional qualifications.	Fifteen (15) percent ofrespondents are postgraduates with 4% having not yet completed school and 1% have other qualifications. Hardiman and Burgin (2011:1327), found in their study of canyoning adventure recreation in Australia that 51.6% of the respondents were university students or had a graduate degree.Figure 4.7: Education4.2.8 Group size
As can be seen from the above (Figure 4.8), 72% of respondents paid f and 5 people in the travelling group.	Nineteen (19) percent did
r between 1 not pay for
themselves, and 4% of respondents paid for groups of more than 21. Three (3)
Figure 4.8: Group size
percent of participants paid
for groups between 6 and 10 people
and 1% of
participants paid for groups results correspond well with
between 11 to 15, and 16 to 20, respectively. These the results of Crompton and McKay (1997:432) who
found that 33.3% of respondents travel in group sizes of 5 or more.4.2.9 Mode of Transport used by ParticipantsIn Figure 4.9, it can be seen that the participants mostly make use of sedan-typeFigure 4.9: Mode of transport
vehicles (38%). Seventeen (17) percent of respondents chose 4x4 vehicles and 16%make use of 2x4 or bakkies.   Twelve (12) percent make use of recreation vehicles,10% use vehicles such as microbuses and 8% have other forms of transport that include coaches, cycles and SUVs.4.2.10 Number of time participated in adventure activitiesSixty-nine (69) percent of the respondents indicated that they participate in adventure
activities between 1 and 3
times a year.	Twelve (12) percent of
respondents
participate in adventure activities 4 to 6times, 11% participate 7 to 10 times a yearand 8% of respondents take part in activities more than 10 times a year. ThisFigure 4.10: Amount of adventure activitiescorresponds with the ADVENTURE TOURISM MARKET REPORT (2010:8) stating that participants took at least three adventure trips and were already planning the next trip.4.2.11 Importance of activitiesRespondents were required to rate the importance of different adventure activities, as listed in Table 4.1, on a 5-point Likert scale. Magoebaskloof Adventures do not offer all the activities, but the respondents were asked to provide information about the activities in general.
In Table 4.1, respondents rate the following activities as ¡§Not important at all¡¨ to ¡§slightly important¡¨:* Surfing	51%* Cycling	46%* Body Boarding	45%* Rock Climbing	45%* Bungee Jumping	44%* Scuba Diving	44%* Archery	44%* Mountain-Biking	42%* Kayaking	41%* Backpacking	38%Table 4.1: Activity importanceActivity   Not Importantat all Slightly ImportantImportant  Very ImportantExtremely ImportantAbseiling15%15%22%23%25%Backpacking21%17%34%18%10%Cycling16%30%26%15%13%Caving	/Spelunking21%12%32%18%17%Hiking12%19%34%19%16%Horseback Riding21%12%35%21%11%Motor-cycling26%13%22%16%23%Archery25%19%19%20%17%Body Boarding28%17%29%17%9%Snorkelling17%20%25%21%17%Rock climbing27%18%26%18%11%Mountain biking20%22%30%17%11%Quad biking13%16%23%28%20%Bungee Jumping34%10%25%16%15%
4x4 Route Driving15%12%22%26%25%Canoeing12%20%29%21%18%Kayaking17%24%27%18%14%Scuba Diving16%28%33%12%11%Surfing35%16%23%19%7%White-waterRafting14%10%29%29%18%Parachuting18%15%31%21%15%Fishing18%17%24%17%24%Participants rate the following activities as ¡§Important¡¨:* Horseback Riding	35%Participants rate the following activities as ¡§Very important¡¨ to ¡§Extremely Important¡¨, according to Table 4.1:* 4x4 Route	51%* Abseiling	48%* Quad biking	48%* White-water rafting	47%* Fishing	41%* Canoeing	39%* Snorkelling	38%* Parachuting	36%* Caving	35%* Hiking	35%4.2.12 Dining preferencesFrom Table (Table 4.4), it can be seen that the respondents favour self-catering accommodation the most with a 67% responding ¡§YES¡¨ to the option. The dine-out option followed with 60%, Bed & Breakfast was the third most-favoured option with 48% and Dinner, Bed and breakfast was the least favourite option with just 40%.
Table 4.2: Dining PreferencesAccommodation and diningoptionsYESNOSelf-catering67%33%Dine out & Self-catering60%40%Bed & Breakfast48%52%Dinner, Bed & Breakfast40%60%4.2.13 MediaThe following media sources were regularly read, listened to or watched by respondents:4.2.13.1 MagazinesRespondents indicated that they read a wide variety of magazines. The following magazines were the most read among respondents: HuisGenoot, Getaway, FHM, Sports Illustrated and Garden & Home.4.2.13.2 News PapersA relatively wide variety of newspapers is available to the respondents. The top five chosen are Beeld, Review, Rapport, the Citizen and the Star.4.2.13.3 TV-ProgrammesThe television program categories most watched were Sport, News, Nature, Soap Operas and ¡§Reality¡¨ programmes.4.2.13.4 Radio stationThe top five preferred radio stations indicated by the respondents were as follows: 5FM, Jacaranda FM, RSG, Highveld and Phalaphala FM.
4.2.14 Heard about the resort Table 4.3: AdvertisingWhen asked how the respondents came to hear about the resort, they responded as follows. Fifty-five (55) percent of the respondents visited the website, and 53% heard about the resort from family and friends. Magazines were helpful resources to 21% and 21% of the respondents havepreviously visited the resort. Seven (7) percent of the respondents heard about the resort on the radio and 5% gathered information from shows.Other options available to, and chosen by, some of the respondents included competitions, they drove by, they lived nearby, company teambuilding sessions and word-of-mouth.To summarise, the profile of adventure tourist, Table 4.4 was constructed.Table 4.4: Profile of adventure touristDescriptionResultAge33 yearsGenderMaleLanguageEnglishMarriage statusMarriedEducation levelDiploma / DegreeVehicle typeSedanCountrySouth AfricaProvinceLimpopo ProvinceGroup travel size1 to 5 peopleParticipation rate1 to 3 times per yearActivityExtremely Important: 4x4 RouteAbseilCatering PreferenceSelf-catering
MediaMagazine: Huis Genoot; Get Away News Paper: Beeld; Review Television: Nature, News, SportRadio: 54FM, Jacaranda, RSGAdvertising mediumInternetSECTION B4.3 TRAVEL MOTIVES (Factor Analyses)In the following section, the travel motives indicated by the factor analyses will be discussed. Oblique simple structure rotation was used in the factor analysis. With oblique rotations, the factors are allowed to become correlated (Rummel, 2012:1). For each factor, a Cronbach¡¦s Alpha, or reliability coefficient, was computed to estimate the internal consistency of each factor (Kruger & Saayman, 2008). The Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin measure of sampling adequacy was used as this aims to examine whether the strength of the relationships between the variables are large enough to proceed to a factor analysis (Kruger & Saayman, 2008:66). The declared percentage of Kaiser-Meyer-Olkinis 70.18%. For adventure tourists travelling to Magoebaskloof Adventures, the measure was a most acceptable 0.801. The factor analyses (Pattern Matrix) identified seven factors,which retained 70% of the variation data, and based on Table 4.2, they are Prestige and Status, Group togetherness, Knowledge seeking, Escape and relaxation, Photography and attraction, Enhancing relation and Novelty.   For each of the factors the Cronbach¡¦s Alpha and mean values were determined.
Table 4.5: Factor analyses for participation in activitiesFactor LabelsFactor 1: Prestige& StatusFactor 2: GroupTogethernessFactor 3:Knowledge seekingFactor 4: Escape &RelaxationFactor 5: Photography& AttractionFactor 6:Enhancing RelationFactor 7:NoveltyMean Value3.263.933.244.152.943.313.66Cronbach¡¦s Alpha0.8110.7880.8370.7270.6780.6150.551Increased sense of personal growth0.75607To learn new skills0.72266Feeling of success after completion of activity0.62748To overcome fear0.54725Interaction with environment/people0.49435Recreational Opportunity0.34577Family   recreation   or	to spend   time   withsomeone special0.74026Fun and excitement0.67843To spend time with friends0.60901So members in the party can learn aboutadventure0.78885So members in the party can share in challenge0.76896Primarily for education reasons0.49829To explore a new destination0.34681Get away from routine0.86565To Relax0.75157Photography0.77275Grew up with adventure activities0.66238To be part of an expedition0.48421Friends arranged it0.82218To tell my friends of the experience0.60879I have the experience to do it myself0.57220Want to do the activity before too old0.75787The journey with friends and family is important0.43326To do something different0.3165892
Factor 1: Prestige and statusPrestige and status included the following aspects: ¡¥increased personal growth¡¦¡¦, ¡¥to learn new skills¡¦, ¡¥feeling of success after completion of activity¡¦, ¡¥to overcome fear¡¦ and ¡¥interaction with environment/people¡¦. Prestige and status has a mean value of 3.26, placing it as the factor with the fourth-highest value. Riley (1995, as cited by Singh 2004:17) confirms that prestige is a motivation to participate in adventure. The Cronbach¡¦s Alpha for prestige and status is 0.811.Factor 2: Group togethernessGroup togetherness included such aspects as ¡¥recreational opportunity¡¦, ¡¥family recreation¡¦, ¡¥to spend time with someone special¡¦, ¡¦fun and excitement¡¦ and ¡¥to spend time with friends¡¦. Group togetherness has been identified by Kruger and Saayman (2009) as a motive while conducting a study in a National Park. The ¡§Group togetherness¡¨ factor has the second highest mean value of 3.93.   Waitt, Lane and Head (2003:535), also determined that to develop relationships is one of the important motivations when traveling to nature destinations (where most of the adventure activities take place). The Cronbach¡¦s Alpha for prestige and status is 0.788.Factor 3: Knowledge seekingKnowledge seeking is the third lowest factor with a mean value of 3.24. The factor consists of the following subcategories, ¡¥members in party can learn about adventure¡¦, ¡¥members in party can share in challenge¡¦ and ¡¥primary for education reasons¡¦. The Cronbach¡¦s Alpha for prestige and status is 0.837. Knowledge seeking is a motive commonly found with nature products (Kruger & Saayman, 2009:100).Factor 4: Escape and RelaxationEscape and relaxation has a mean value of 4.15, which makes it the factor with the highest mean value. Escape and relaxation included the subcategories ¡¥to explore a new destination¡¦, ¡¥to get away from routine¡¦ and ¡¥to relax¡¦. According to Kruger and Saayman (2009:67), numerous researchers have confirmed this motive. Waitt, Lane and Head (2003:535), again agree that relaxation is important when traveling to nature destinations and participate in nature activities. Sharplay (2006:36) confirms
that escape is a motivation to participate in adventure tourism. The Cronbach¡¦s Alpha for prestige and status is 0.727.Factor 5: Photography and Attraction¡¥Photography¡¦, ¡¥grew up with adventure activities¡¦ and ¡¥to be part of an expedition¡¦ are the subcategories that together form Photography and attraction. The mean value for Photography and attraction is 2.94, thus placing it last. Kim et al. (2006) indicated that attraction is an important travel motivator.   Photography is an adventure activity that falls under soft adventure, and often people undertake photographic safaris that are led by experienced guides (Mill, 2010:1). The Cronbach¡¦s Alpha for prestige and status is 0.678.Factor 6: Enhancing relationThe subcategories for the Enhancing relation value factor are ¡¥friends arranged it¡¦, ¡¥to tell my friends of the experience¡¦ and ¡¥have the experience to do it myself¡¦. Mohammed and Som (2010) confirm that Enhancing relation is a motive for travelling.   This is the sixth factor, having a mean value of 3.31.   The Cronbach¡¦s Alpha for prestige and status is 0.615.Factor 7: NoveltyNovelty has a mean value of 3.66, making it the factor with the third highest mean value. ¡¥Want to do the activity before too old¡¦ and ¡¥journey with friends and family is important¡¦ and ¡¥to do something different¡¦ form part of this factor.   Lee (2000), as well as Crompton and McKay (1997) have confirmed Novelty to be a common motive for travelling. Novelty has a Cronbach¡¦s Alpha value of 0.551.Escape and relaxation is seen as the most important factor as it has the highest mean value in this study. Bentley and Page (2007:858) is of the opinion that the adventurer weighs risk against benefits such as self-fulfilment and social approval. In other words they are interested in the prestige and status of the activity. Mehmetoglu (2007:208) found that novelty and learning was the main reason why participants travel to participate in adventure. Meyer et al., (2002:294) with a study on the motives of scuba divers, found that male participants classified the risk involved as important, and the female participants where interested in the prestige.
Females want to prove that they can join in a male dominated sport. It can be concluded that escape and relaxation is not such an important motive for adventure tourists to travel and participate in adventure activities. It must be kept in mind, however, that the activities at Magoebaskloof Adventures fall largely into the soft adventure category. This leads to the results not showing thrill seeking, terror and adrenaline as strong motives for participating in adventure activities.
4.4 CONCLUSIONAfter the collected data was recorded and statistically analysed, the following conclusions could be made. The profile of adventure tourists to Magoebaskloof adventure are as follows: The typical adventure tourist is male and 33 years of age, speaks English, is married and has a diploma or graduate degree. The adventure tourist travels in a group of five, participates in adventure activities three times a year and drives a sedan motor vehicle. The adventure tourist prefers self-catering accommodation.The participants identified the following five activities as importantto very important: 4x4 route, abseiling, quad biking, white-water rafting and fishing.The factor analyses revealed seven factors that motivate adventure tourists to travel and participate in adventure activities. These factors included prestige and status, group togetherness, knowledge seeking, escape and relaxation, photography and attraction, enhancing relation and, lastly, novelty. Escape and relaxation is the factor with the highest mean value of 4.15, making it the most important reason why tourists travel to participate in adventure activities.Magoebaskloof adventure offers a variety of adventure activities that include quad biking, tubing, kloofing and canopy tours. The activities, however, do not fall under extreme adventure activities.
CHAPTER 5CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS5.1 INTRODUCTIONThe aim of this study was to determine the travel motives of adventure tourists, case study Magoebaskloof Adventures. The aim of this chapter is to draw conclusions and to make recommendations resulting from the research. The following objectives needed to be reached in order to complete the study:Objective one: To develop a profile of adventure tourists who participate in adventure activities: The objective was reached in Chapter 2 where a literature analysis was done concerning the profile of the adventure tourists and once more in Chapter 4 where the results of this study were analysed to determine the profile of adventure tourists to Magoebaskloof Adventures.Objective two: A literature analysis of adventure tourismThe objective was achieved in Chapter 2 with a theoretical analysis of adventure tourism. The main aspects that were discussed were as follows: an overview of adventure tourism, the history of adventure tourism and how it began, the term adventure tourism was defined including the terms soft and hard tourism, forms of adventure travelling, adventure tourism activities and the adventure travel market.Objective three: A literature analysis of tourist behaviour and travel motivesThis objective was reached in Chapter 3 where an overview of tourist behaviour and travel motives was given. Tourist behaviour was explained along with the decision making process. The factors that influence the tourist decision-making process were analysed and discussed. The different theories of travel motives of Maslow, Iso- Ahola, Push and Pull theory were discussed.   Research of travel motives in general was given and then travel motives specific to adventure tourism were examined.Objective four: To conduct a factor analysis of tourists travel motivations to adventure tourist. The objective was reached in Chapter 4. Data collected from questionnaires
was analysed and a factor analyses were conducted to specify the travel motives of adventure tourists at Magoebaskloof Adventures.Objective five: To make recommendations and conclusions based on the information uncovered. The objective will be met in this chapter where the main conclusions of each chapter and recommendations will be given.5.2 CONCLUSIONS REGARDING RESEARCHThe conclusions regarding the research are divided as follows:* Firstly, a conclusion will be drawn regarding the literature analysis of adventure tourism (Chapter 2).* Secondly, a conclusion will be drawn concerning the literature analysis of the adventure tourists¡¦ behaviour and travel motives (Chapter 3).* Third and last, a conclusion regarding the empirical research (Chapter 4) will be reached.5.2.1 Conclusions regarding   the literature analysis   of   adventure   tourism(Chapter 2)The following conclusions can be drawn regarding adventure tourism:? Adventure tourism has formed part of the human race for a long time (c.f. 2.1).? Early adventurers included groups such as pilgrims, traders, seasonal migrates, mercenaries, traders, hunters and merchants on expeditions (c.f. 2.1).? Adventure tourism is growing into a popular niche and has become a rapidly expanding sector of the tourism industry. Participants believe that adventure tourism can provide experiences that overcome certain fears of life (c.f. 2.1).? New skills can be learned and developed through adventure (c.f. 2.1).? Adventure tourism is based on a wide variety of activities ranging from the less-energetic to ultra-fit thrill-seeking activities (c.f. 2.1).? Adventure tourism was a way of life for explorers discovering new places and dates back as far as ancient Greece and ancient Rome (c.f. 2.2).
? Hedonists seek pleasure and have a long history as it was found that Romans and the Greeks who were largely responsible for introducing the idea to travel (c.f. 2.2).? Explorers and adventurers include Diaz, Van Riebeeck and Amelia Earhart who searched for new lands and charted the previously unknown (c.f. 2.2).? Mercenaries offered their services as fighters to help others needing their services, always provided they would be paid (c.f. 2.2).? Pilgrims form part of one of the oldest forms of tourism, and pilgrims travelled through relatively unknown country to spiritual sites (c.f. 2.2).? Traders travelled to new destinations to trade and often suffered from criminal attacks (c.f. 2.2).? Settlers and colonisers travelled to new destinations with the purpose of making them their permanent home (c.f. 2.2).? Seasonal migrants travelled for work purposes when necessary (c.f. 2.2).? Missionaries were sent out as travellers to convert people to their religious views (c.f. 2.2).? People who put themselves against nature and their own weaknesses are known as the ¡¥Outward Bound¡¦ tradition (c.f. 2.2).? The romantic era mountain sports, was known for the upper class people who opted to participate in mountain sports to ¡¥test¡¦ their skills (c.f. 2.2).? Natural historians travelled to new destinations in search of new species of fauna and flora (c.f. 2.2).? Woman travellers played a major role in adventure tourism development, as more women became interested in travelling off the beaten track (c.f. 2.2).? Travel writing dates back to ancient Greece, and there has been a development in travel writers as travel media expanded (c.f. 2.2).? Adventure tourism is a means of expression for people with a restless spirit and who find it difficult to fit into conventional society (c.f. 2.2).? Artificial environments such as indoor ski-slopes are a growing feature in adventure tourism, but lack certain qualities integral to adventure (c.f. 2.2).? For designer adventurers, it is important that activities have new features andthat the participants can develop their own specialist clothing and patois (c.f. 2.2).
? The term adventure can be defined as the deliberate search of risk and uncertain outcomes, where the principal attraction is an outdoor activity that relies on the natural terrain and generally requires specialised gear (c.f. 2.3.1).? Adventure has different meaning to different people and contains fear, terror, a feeling of conquest and of success; it is daring and risky and provides the tourist with relatively high levels of sensory stimulation (c.f. 2.3.1).? Four stages of adventure are proposed by Mortlock, play, adventure, frontier adventure and misadventure (c.f. 2.3.1.1).? There are four key elements of adventure: risk, responsibility, uncertainty and commitment (c.f. 2.3.1.1).? Soft adventure refers to activities that have perceived risks, require less physical skill and little or no experience, such as camping, biking and horseback riding. Most soft adventure activities are led by experienced guides (c.f. 2.3.1.1).? With hard adventure, participants must be both physically and mentally fit to participate in the activity and participants thrive when they are exposed to high levels of risk. Hard adventure activities include sky-diving, white-water rafting and cave exploring (c.f. 2.3.1.1).? Adventure tourism has a number of attributes that distinguish it from other forms of tourism. The adventure tourists take risks, thrive on physical challenge, seek novelty and engage in adventure for personal development (c.f. 2.3.2).? Adventure tourism can be viewed as travel to a destination to take part in adventurous activities (c.f. 2.3.2).? Adventure tourism is more than mere travelling as there are different types of adventure travel (c.f. 2.3.2.1)? People travel to see areas affected by disasters, for example, tsunami- affected areas and earthquake zones (c.f. 2.3.2.1).? Tourists explore the jungle regions of the word, and study or admire the scenery and its flora and fauna (c.f. 2.3.2.1).? Accessible tourism focuses on the physically disabled tourists. Excursions are now provided for the mobility-challenged tourists and include activities such as bungee jumping (c.f. 2.3.2.1).
? The best-known form of hard adventure is thrill tourism that includes activities such as bungee jumping, base-jumping and mountaineering (c.f. 2.3.2.1).? An adventure tourist seeks out an original and exciting holiday, with an opportunity to engage in self-discovery and cultural exchange, often in a faraway place (c.f. 2.3.3).? Adventure tourists have a number of attributes that distinguish them from other tourists. They are more experienced, independent and flexible, have changed values, changed lifestyles and changed demographics (c.f. 2.3.3.1).? Adventure tourists make their holiday choices according to their lifestyle and not based upon their age (c.f. 2.3.3.1).? Adventure tourists tend to be young, affluent, educated thrill seekers who have significant sums of money to spend in their pursuits of adventure (c.f. 2.3.3.1).? Adventure tourists want to see a destination through the eyes of the local population (c.f. 2.3.3.1).? Adventure tourists attribute more value to the benefits they gain from their holidays (c.f. 2.3.3.1).? Today, tourists have more experience in travelling (c.f. 2.3.3.1).? The change in lifestyle means that adventure tourists have more free time and they choose to take short breaks more frequently (c.f. 2.3.3.1).? Adventure tourists are young and educated, active thrill seekers, who are of the age range 25-55 (c.f. 2.3.3.1).? Adventure tourists follow word-of-mouth recommendations from friends and family (c.f. 2.3.3.1).? Adventure tourists prefer activities that are more fitness orientated, healthy and exciting and watch programmes about history, culture and wildlife (c.f. 2.3.3.1).? Adventure tourists seek safe, exciting destinations and want an experienced adventure company (c.f. 2.3.3.1).? Adventure tourists prefer to travel in an environmentally-friendly manner and learn from new cultures (c.f. 2.3.3.1).? Adventure tourists may travel solo, as couples, in private groups or as honeymooners (c.f. 2.3.3.1).
? There has been a major change in tourists¡¦ lifestyle over the last decade, as they have become more health conscious (c.f. 2.3.3.2).? Adventure tourists are more experienced, more independent, more flexible and have changed values as they sought fulfilment through their adventures (c.f. 2.3.3.2).? Adventure tourism activities can be divided into land-, water-, air-based and mixed activities (c.f. 2.3.4).? When concentrating on the adventure tourism market, the focus shifts from the individual traveller to the market as a whole (c.f. 2.5).? When data is available, there is a lack of conformity of data between different countries (c.f. 2.5).? The adventure tourism market consists of more than one aspect and can include adventure day-trip market, the hidden adventure tourism market and the non-physical adventure tourism market (c.f. 2.5.1.1).? The future of the adventure tourism market has a bright outlook as it is still developing and growing (c.f. 2.5.1.1).? There exist uncontrollable elements such as climate change and political instability that can have a negative effect on the adventure tourism market (2.5.1.1).5.2.2 Conclusions regarding the literature analysis of tourist behaviour and travel motives (Chapter 3)The following conclusions can be drawn from Chapter 3:* Motivations are the underlying forces that arouse and direct the behaviour of tourists (c.f. 3.1).* Adventure tourists need to release tension and do so in different ways (c.f. 3.1).* Tourists search for leisure experiences by interacting with new or different features of the places they visit (c.f. 3.2).* Consumer behaviour and tourist behaviour show clear differences when compared (c.f. 3.2).
* Five phases of tourist behaviour are identified which include pre-purchase, travel to the site, on-site experience, return travel component and extended recall and recollection stage (c.f. 3.2).* Tourists share their experiences with others and make joint decisions about the next experience (c.f. 3.2).* When the behaviour of tourists is understood, specialised tourism products can be developed and marketing that is more effective can be undertaken (c.f. 3.2).* The tourism buying decision has unique aspects as tourist products are investments without any tangible rate of return (c.f. 3.2).* Tourist behaviour is important both to the tourist and to the product provider (c.f. 3.2).* It is important to understand the tourists¡¦ behaviour in order to develop specialised tourism products, and to plan marketing effectively (c.f. 3.2).* The tourism buying decision has unique aspects (c.f. 3.2).* Tourism behaviour can be influenced by different factors, and these factors must be understood. The factors are: how tourists perceive destination advertising, learn to consume and travel, make their travel decisions, and how their personality affects their decision (c.f. 3.2).* The tourist decision-making process consists of five steps, these being: problem recognition, information seeking, the evaluation of alternative, the purchase decision and lastly the post-purchase evaluation (c.f. 3.2).* The decision making model of Kinnear et al. (1995) is used to analyse the factors that play a role in the purchase decision-making process (c.f. 3.2).* Demographic factors that influence the decision making process include age, gender, education, income, race, marital status and household size (c.f. 3.2).* Situational factors include physical surroundings, social surroundings, temporal perspective, task definition, antecedent states (c.f. 3.2).* Marketing factors include destination image, role of marketing, activities of marketing, market segmentation and image building (c.f. 3.2).* The internal/psychological factors are motivation, perception, learning, personality and attitudes (c.f. 3.2).
* External/social factors that influence the decision making process are culture, social class and groups (c.f. 3.2).* When the motives behind tourist travel are known, marketing that is more effective can be done and the more specific factors can be kept in mind that can subsequently lead to competitive advantage in the tourism market sector (c.f. 3.3).* Travel motives theorieso Maslow has developed a hierarchy of needs model that assists in understanding human motivation (c.f. 3.3.1).o Maslow argues that if  the psychological, safety and belonging needs are fulfilled, the individual will be motivated to fill needs such as esteem and self-actualisation (c.f. 3.3.1).o Maslow¡¦s model was originally intended for use in clinical psychology, but can be applied across other fields including marketing and tourism (c.f. 3.3.1).o Maslow¡¦s hierarchy of needs model consists of biological and physiological needs, safety needs, belongingness, esteem and self- actualisation needs (c.f. 3.3.1)o Iso-Ahola developed a four-dimensional model that includes the dimensions of personal escape, interpersonal escape, personal rewards and interpersonal rewards (c.f. 3.3.2).o There are nine motives why adventure tourists travel, according to thepush and pull theory (c.f. 3.3.3).o Push factors refer to the forces that influence the tourists¡¦ decisions to take a vacation; pull factors influence the tourists¡¦ decisions about the destination (c.f. 3.3.3).o Plog has developed the influential Allocentrism/Psychocentrism model based on his work with the airline industry (c.f. 3.3.4).* Previous research on adventure travel motiveso Tourists have different motives to travel to different settings and destinations (c.f. 3.4).o Pearce notes that there are fourteen core factors indicating that motives were built on interest: novelty, escape/relax, relationship, strengthening, autonomy, seeking nature, self-development through involvement with
hosts or the site, stimulation, self-development of a personal kind, relationship security, self-actualisation, isolation, nostalgia, romance and recognition (c.f. 3.4).o Decrop argues that motives can be grouped into six categories:? Discover new things? Rest and relaxation? Share in social experiences? Exciting activities and having fun? Personal values? Authentic environment (c.f. 3.4).o Marine destinations can provide novelty, arousal or stimulation to satisfy tourists needs (c.f. 3.4).o Swarbrooke determined motives of adventure tourists, for example, thrill, fear, challenge, terror, risk, daring and more (c.f. 3.4).o Rock climbers can experience general sensation, thrill, adventure and gain experience when participating in the adventure activity (c.f. 3.4).o Table 3.3 provides a summary of previous research done on adventure tourism (c.f. 3.4).o Escape and challenge is identified as some of the more important motives for adventure activities (c.f. 3.4).o Tourists with similar profiles travel to the same destinations, but have different motives for doing so (c.f. 3.4).There is a difference between the travel motives of tourists in general and the motives of adventure tourists (c.f. 3.4).o When the unique motives of adventure tourists are understood, tailor-made packages can be developed to suite the specific market segment (c.f. 3.4).5.2.3 Conclusions regarding the empirical research (Chapter 4)The following will summarise the important aspects of the empirical results from Chapter 4. The aim of the research was to determine the travel motives of adventure tourists. When travel motives are clear, more effective marketing and product development can be done, which can lead to a competitive advantage
* A quantitative research approach was used to collect data at Magoebaskloof Adventures in Limpopo Province over a three-month period (c.f. 4.2).* A profile of an adventure tourist are as follows:Table 5.1: Profile of an adventure touristProfileResultsHome languageEnglish (51%) (c.f. 4.3.1)Age21-33 years (49%) (c.f. 4.3.2)GenderMale (56%) (c.f. 4.3.3)Marital statusMarried (48%) (c.f. 4.3.4)CountryRSA (97%) (c.f. 4.3.5)Province of residenceLimpopo (51%) (c.f. 4.3.6)Level of educationDiploma/Degree (31%) (c.f. 4.3.7)Group travel size1 to 5 People (72%) (c.f. 4.3.8)Vehicle typeSedan (38%) (c.f. 4.3.9)Participation rate1 to 3 times per year (69%) (c.f. 4.3.10)ActivityExtremely Important:-	4x4 Route (51%) (c.f. 4.3.11)-	Abseil (48%) (c.f. 4.3.11)Catering PreferenceSelf-catering (67%) (c.f. 4.3.12)MediaMagazine: Huis Genoot; Get Away (c.f. 4.3.13.1) News Paper: Beeld; Review (c.f. 4.3.13.2) Television: Nature, News, Sport (4.3.13.3)Radio: 54FM, Jacaranda, RSG (c.f. 4.3.13.4)Advertising mediumWebsite (55%) (c.f. 4.3.14)* Participation in adventure activities are as follows:Table 5.2: Participation in adventure activitiesDescriptionResultsTravelling party1 ¡V 5 (72%) (c.f. 4.3.8)
Mode of transportSedan (38%) (c.f. 4.3.9)Frequency of participation2 ¡V 10 (58%) (c.f. 4.3.10)A Factor Analysis was done to determine the travel motives of the participants, and the following seven factors were revealed:* Factor 1: ¡§Prestige and status¡¨ included the following aspects: ¡¥personal growth¡¦, ¡¥skills¡¦, ¡¥success¡¦, ¡¥recreation opportunity¡¦ and ¡¥interaction¡¦.* Factor 2: ¡§Group togetherness¡¨ included aspects such as ¡¥Family recreation,¡¦, ¡¥fun¡¦, ¡¦time with friends¡¦ and ¡¥new destination¡¦.* Factor 3: ¡§Knowledge seeking¡¨ included aspects such as ¡¥learn¡¦, ¡¥share challenge¡¦ and ¡¥education¡¦* Factor 4: ¡§Escape and relaxation¡¨ included aspects such as ¡¥get away¡¦, ¡¥relax¡¦ and ¡¥different¡¦.* Factor 5: ¡§Photography and Attraction¡¨ included the following aspects: ¡¥photo¡¦, ¡¥grew up¡¦ and ¡¥expedition¡¦* Factor 6: ¡§Enhancing relation¡¨ included the following aspects: ¡¥arranged¡¦, ¡¥experience¡¦ and express self¡¦.* Factor 7: ¡§Novelty¡¨ included the following aspects ¡¥old¡¦ and ¡¥journey¡¦.Escape and relaxation is seen as the most important factor as it has the highest mean value. Thus, it may be the main reason adventure tourists travel to participate in adventure activities. Group togetherness, the second highest factor, also fits in with the soft adventure category.Soft adventure, as mentioned in chapter 2, has perceived risks, but does not require much physical skill or experience. It includes a wide range of activities such as camping, biking, hiking and horse riding.Swarbrookeet al., (2003:7) indicated that adventure tourists are motivated by thrill, fear, adventure, excitement, adrenaline, terror, expedition, daring. When looking at travel motives in general, the following motivations were identified from previous studies: family togetherness, socialising, escape, relaxation, social/leisure and knowledge seeking. It is thus clear that escape and relaxation falls under travel motives in general and is not specific to adventure travel.
5.3 RECOMMENDATIONS WITH REGARD TO TRAVEL MOTIVATIONS OF ADVENTURE TOURISTS:5.3.1 The following recommendations can be made regarding the travel motives of adventure tourists:* ¡§Escape and relaxation¡¨ was identified as the strongest motive for adventure tourists that participate in the adventure activities at Magoebaskloof Adventures. The resort must develop their marketing strategy to focus on the soft adventure market and should promote the resort as a destination where the soft adventure tourist can relax and escape from their daily routine.* Magoebaskloof Adventures can develop the few hard adventure activities such as kloofing, for example, and promote it more aggressively to attract a wider variety of tourists to the resort.* ¡§Group togetherness¡¨ was rated as the second highest motive. Family and friends tend to travel in groups to Magoebaskloof Adventure especially to participate in the Canopy tours they offer. It is a fun way to experience nature, while spending time with family. Marketers can expand their group packages to include meals and a variety of other activities to enhance the adventure experience, and so motivate return visits. The group teambuilding activities market can also be expanded and marketedmore intensely particularly in the winter months, when the water- based activities are not offered due to the cold weather. The teambuilding activities must be more outcomes based. Adequate facilitation must be done after completion of the activity to ensure that goals were met and participants had the ultimate adventure experience.5.3.2 Recommendations with regard to future research:* It is recommended that future research should include a larger portion of the adventure tourism market, to overcome the limitations of this study by testing at a variety of destinations that offer adventure activities. A wider market survey will help to fill in gaps that may have occurred and will enable better understanding of the needs of the adventure tourist.* It is recommended that a survey must be done at different resorts that offer a variety of activities that fall into both the hard and soft adventure categories, and in different parts of South Africa. The results can then be compared to
determine how the hard adventure tourists are differently motivated from the soft adventure tourists.* It is recommended that similar research should be done to determine the travel motives of South African tourists that travel to foreign countries to participate in adventure tourism activities.5.3.3 Limitations of the study:* The data is collected from one resort only, and thus limits the results. The range of activities at the chosen resort was limited and thus did not attract a wide variety of adventure tourists.
References*Aaker, D.A., Kumar, V. & Day, G.S. 2007. Marketing research. 9thed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 774 p.Active-tourism. 2002. Official definition of active tourism. http://www.active-tourism. com/Questions1ActTour.html Date of access: 20 June 2010.Albers-Miller, N.D. 2012. Situational influences on the purchase decision. http:// facultyweb.berry.edu/nmiller/classinfo/601/Module%203/influences.htm Date of access: 10 January 2012.Allen, J. 2010. Soft adventure vs. hard adventure.   http://www.examiner.com/x- 40649- Denver-International-Travel-Examiner~y2010m3d28-Soft-Adventure-vs-Hard- Adventure. Date of access: 14 April 2010.AllYouCanRead. 2010. Top 10 travel magazines. http://www.allyoucanread.com/ top-10-travel-magazines/ Date of access: 19 August 2010.Anic, I &Radas, S. 2006. The impact of situational factors on purchasing outcomes in the Croatian hypermarket retrailer. Ekonomskipregled, 57(11): 730-752.Armstrong, G. &Kotler, P. 2005. Marketing: an introduction. 7thed. London: Prentice Hall. 581 p.Banerjea, S. 2010. The main theories of travel motivation. http://www.helium.com/ items/138977-the-main-theories-of-travel-motivation. Date of access: 14 April 2010.Banyai, M. 2009. The image of tourism destinations: a case study of Dracula tourism. http://uwspace.uwaterloo.ca/bitstream/10012/4600/1/Banyai_Maria.pdf Date of access: 17 March 2012.Barb, T. 2010. Types of adventure travelling. http://articleresource.org/travel-and- leisure/adventure-travel/types-of-adventure-traveling-32319 Date of access: 20 June 2010.
Beh, A. & Bruyere, B.L. 2007. Segmentation by visitor motivation in three Kenyan national reserves. Tourism and management, 28(6):1464-1471.Bellis, M. 2012. What is marketing? http://inventors.about.com/od/fundinglicensingmarketing/f/Marketing.htm Date of access: 9 January 2012.Beneke, J., Silverstone, G., Woods, A. & Schneider, G. 2011. The influence of the youth on their parents¡¦ purchasing decisions of high-technology products. African journal of business management, 5(10):3807-3812.Bentley, T.A. & Page, S.J. 2008. A decade of injury monitoring in the New Zealand adventure tourism sector: a summary risk analysis. Tourism management, 29(5):857-889.Bentley, T.A., Page, S.J. & Macky, K.A. 2007. Adventure tourism and adventure sports injury: the New Zealand experience. Applied ergonomics, 38(6):791-796.Benton, F. 2008. Trends in tourism. http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:http://www.travelmontana. mt.gov/research/TourismTrends08.pdfDate of access: 6 August 2012.Blain, R. 2010. The evolution of man: the history of hunting. http://ezinearticles. com/?The-Evolution-of-Man---The-History-of-Hunting&id=25107 Date of access: 19 August 2010.Bonera, M. 2008. The vacation decision making process: tourism in the Garda Lake. (8th Global Conference on Business and Economics, 18-19 October 2008. Florence, Italy. 19 p.)Brand South Africa (BSA). 2010. South Africa: adventure heaven! http://www. southafrica.info/travel/adventure/adventure.htm Date of access: 2 June 2010.
Brown, C. 2012. Factors which influence customer buying behaviour. http://www. upublish.info/Article/Factors-Which-Influence-Customer-Buying-Decision/330998 Date of access: 9 January 2012.Buckley, R. 2007. Adventure tourism products: price, duration, size, skill, remoteness. Tourism management, 28(3):1428-1433.Calhoun, N. 2011. Consumer decision making: external factors of choice. http://nicolette-calhoun.suite101.com/consumer-decision-making-external-factors-of- choice-a351316 Date of access: 17 March 2012.Chang, J. 2006. Segmenting tourists to aboriginal cultural festivals: an example in the Rukai tribal area, Taiwan. Tourism management, 27(6):1224-1234.Chapman, A. 2001. Maslow¡¦s hierarchy of needs. http://www.businessballs.com/maslow.htm Date of access: 7 June 2011.Cherry, K. 2011. Hierarchy of needs: the five levels of Maslow¡¦s hierarchy of needs. http://psychology.about.com/od/theoriesofpersonality/a/hierarchyneeds.htm Date of access: 7 June 2011.Choibamroong, T. 2006. Knowledge of tourists' behaviour: a key success factor for managers.   http://www.bu.ac.th/knowledgecenter/epaper/jan_june2006/Teardchai. pdf. Date of access: 08 January 2012.Crompton, J.L. 1985. Needs assessment: taking the pulse of public recreation client. College Station, Tx.: A & M University.Croy, W.G. 2004. The lord of the rings, New Zealand, and tourism: image building with film. http://torc.linkbc.ca/torc/downs1/LordoftheRingsReport.pdf   Date of access: 9 January 2012.Decrop, A. 2006. Vacation decision making. Oxfordshire.http://books.google.co. za/books?id=gYxXuwWoss4C&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&ca d=0#v=onepage&q&f=false Date of access: 6 April 2012.
Degnan, D. 2010. Types of adventure tourism. http://www.ehow.com/ list_ 6517080_types-adventure-tourism.html Date of access: 20 June 2010.Drifters. 2012. Use Drifters for ... http://www.drifters.co.za/ Date of access: 5 January 2012.Du Plessis, L. 2009. Tourists¡¦ perceptions of tourism impacts on the environment: the case of South African National Parks. Potchefstroom: North-West University. Potchefstroom Campus. (Dissertation - MCom). 74 p.Echtner, C.M., & Ritchie, J.R.B. 2003. The meaning and measurement of destination image. The journal of tourism studies, 14(1): 37-48.Encarta. 2009. World English dictionary (North American Edition). http://www. worldenglishdictionary.com. London: Bloomsbury Publishing. Date of access: 2 March 2010.Espinoza, A.R.R. 2010. Motivation of nature tourism. http://150.214.182.12:8080/ turismo/turismonet1/economia%20del%20turismo/turismo%20y%20medio%20ambie nte/motivation%20of%20nature%20tourism.pdf Date of access: 2 March 2010.Europe. 2011. Back packing through Europe. http://www.backpacking througheurope.net. Date of access: 2 November 2011.Ewert, A. 1987. Research in outdoor adventure: overview and analysis. The Bradford Papers Annual, 87(2):15-28.Field, A. 2005. Discovering statistics using SPSS. London: Sage.821 p.Fluker, M.R. & Turner, L.W. 2000. Needs, motivations and expectations of a commercial white-water rafting experience. Journal of travel research, 38(4):380- 389, May.Foster, D. 1985. Travel and tourism management. London: Macmillan Education. 343 p.
GeckoGo. 2010. Trips of a lifetime 2010. http://www.geckogo.com/research/ GeckoGo-iExplore-Trip-of-a-Lifetime-Report-2010.pdf Date of access: 3 March 2012.Goossens, C. 2000. Tourism information and pleasure motivation. Annals of Tourism Research, 27(2):301-321.Hallab, Z.A.A. 1999. An exploratory study of the relationship between healthy living and travel behaviour.Virginia Polytechnic institute and State University. (Dissertation¡V PHD). 262p.Hardiman, N. & Burgin, S. 2011. Canyoning adventure recreation in the Blue Mountains World Heritage area (Australia): the canyoners and canyoning trends over the last decade. Tourism management, 32(6):1324-1331.Heneghan, M. 2006. Adventure Tourism. http://www.teagasc.ie/ruraldev/docs/factsheets/55_adventure%20tourism.pdfDate of access: 6 August 2012.Hotelmule. 2011. Sunlust. http://hotelmule.com/wiki/SunlustDate of access: 6 August 2012.Infoplease. 2007. The romantic period. http://www.infoplease.com/ce6/ent/A0858004.html Date of access: 6 August 2012.Inman, J.J., Ferraro, R. &Winer, R.S. 2004. Where the rubber meets the road: a model of in-store consumer decision-making. http://www.cba.uh.edu/mark/papers/ inman.pdf Date of access: 8 January 2012.Ismail, S.T. 2011. The role of marketing information system on decision making ¡§An applied study on Royal Jordanian Air Lines (RJA)¡¨. International journal of business and social science, 2(3):175-185.Jenkins, H. 2008. Intro to adventure tourism. http://www.slideshare.net/ hillarypjenkins/intro-to-adventure-tourism-op-09-presentation. Date of access: 10 May 2010.
Jobtrust Incorporated. 2007. Destination image. http://www.jobtrust.gr/index.php? Section=1&Part=3&Page=159 Date of access: 9 January 2012.Kay, P. 2003. Consumer motivation in a tourism context: continuing the work of Maslow, Rokeach, Vroom, Deci, Haley and others. Conceptual Papers/Marketing Theory. http://smib.vuw.ac.nz:8081/WWW/ANZMAC2003/papers/CON17_kayp.pdf Date of access: 15 January 2011.Kim, H., Borges, M.C. & Chon, J. 2006. Impacts of environmental values on tourism motivations: the case of FICA, Brazil. Tourism management, 27:957-967.Kim, J. & Mueller, C.W. 1978. Factor analysis: statistical methods and practical issues. Beverley Hills, Calif.: Sage Publications. 88 p.Kinnear, T.C., Bernhardt, K.L. &Krentler, K.A.. 1995. Principles of marketing. New York: Harper Collins. 808 p.KnowThis LLC. 2012. Consumer buying behaviour. http://www.knowthis.com/ principles-of-marketing-tutorials/consumer-buying-behavior/consumer-buying- behavior/ Date of access: 9 January 2012.Kozak, M. 2002. Comparative analysis of tourist motivations by nationality and destinations. Tourism management, 23(3):221-232.Kruger, M. & Saayman, M. 2009. Travel motives of visitors attending Oppikoppi music festival. Potchefstroom: North-West University. 73 p.Kruger, M. & Saayman, M. 2010. Travel motivation of tourists to Kruger and Tsitsikamma National Parks: a comprehensive study. South African journal of wildlife research, 40(1):93-102.
Kumar, P. 2011. Family and family life cycle. http://www.slideshare.net/.../family- family-life-cycle-7038901. Date of access: 7 January 2012.Kumar, R. 2009. Sports, adventure and recreation tourism. New Delhi: SBS Publishers & Distributors. 352 p.Lee, C. 2000. A comparative study of Caucasian and Asian visitors to a cultural expo in an Asian setting. Tourism management, 21(2):169-176.Lee, T.H. & Crompton, J. 1992. Measuring novelty seeking in tourism. Annals of Tourism Research, 19(4):732-751.Levenson, M. 1990. Risk taking and personality. Journal of personality and social psychology, 58(6):1073-1080.Lumsdon, L. 1997. Tourism marketing. International Thompson business press. 290p.Mallet, J. 2010. Adventure travel defined. http://www.customadventures. com/adventure.shtml. Date of access: 14 April 2010.Management Study Guide (MSG). 2012. Herzberg¡¦s two-factor theory of motivation. http://www.managementstudyguide.com/herzbergs-theory-motivation.htmDate of access: 6 August 2012.Maree, K. &Pietersen, J. 2007. Surveys and the use of questionnaires. (In Maree, K., ed. First steps in research. Pretoria: Van Schaik Publishers. p. 155-170).McDonald, M. & Dunbar, I. 1995. Market segmentation: a step-by-step approach to creating profitable market segments. London: Macmillan. 271 p.Meyer, L.A., Thapa, B. & Pennington-Grey, L. 2002. An exploration of motivation among scuba divers in North Central Florida. (Proceedings of the 2002 North Eastern Recreation Research Symposium).
Mill, R.C. 2010. Adventure travellers. http://www.atme.org/pubs/members/ 75_311_1336.CFM. Date of access: 14 April 2010.Mohammed, B.A. & Som, A.P.M. 2010. An analysis of push and pull travel motivations of foreign tourists to Jordan. International journal of business and management, 27(12):41-50.Morgan, D., Moore, K. & Mansell, R. 2005. Adventure tourists on water: linking expectations, affect, achievement and enjoyment to the sports tourism adventure. Journal of sport tourism, 10(1):73-88.Mortlock, C. 1984. The adventure alternative.Milnthorpe: Cicerone Press. 160p.Moutinho, L., Ballantyne, R. & Rate, S. 2011. Consumer behaviour in tourism. (InMoutinho, L.Strategic management in tourism. 2nded. Oxfordshire: CABI. p. 83- 126).Neill, J. 2004. Artificial adventure, recreation and leisure environments. http://www. adventuresafety.org/media/pub_articles/future_adv_program.htm Date of access: 19 August 2010.Non?, T. 2009. ThabaMetsi adventures. http://www.thabametsi.com. Date of access: 2 March 2010.Page, S.J. & Connell, J. 2006. Tourism a modern synthesis. 2nded. London: Thomson Learning.Page, S.J., Steele, W. & Connell, J. 2006. Analysing the promotion of adventure tourism: a case study of Scotland. Journal of sport and tourism, 11(1):51-76.Pan, S. & Ryan, C. 2007. Mountain areas and visitor usage - motivations and determinant of satisfaction: the case of Pitongia Forest Park, New Zealand. Journal of sustainable tourism, 15(3):288-308.
Pearce, P., Morrison, A.M. &Ruthledge, J.L. 1998. Tourism: bridges across continents. Sydney: McGraw-Hill. 449 p.Pearce, P.L. 2005. Tourist behaviour themes and conceptual schemes. Bristol: Chanel View Publications. [Electronic books].Pearce, P.L. 2011. Tourist Behaviour and the contemporary world. Bristol: Chanel View Publications. [Electronic books].Pieterson, J. & Maree, K. 2007. Statistical analysis 1: descriptive statistics. (In Maree, K., ed. First steps in research. Pretoria: Van Schaik Publishers. p. 183-196).Pizam, A. & Mansfeld, Y. 1999. Consumer behaviour in travel and tourism. New York: Haworth Hospitality Press. 530 p.Pomfret, G. 2006. Mountaineering adventure tourists: a conceptual framework for research. Tourism management, 27:113-123.Prideaux, B. & Crosswell, m. 2006. The value of visitors surveys: the case of Norfolk Island. Journal of vacation marketing, 12(4): 359-370.Priest, S. & Gass, M.A. 2005. Effective leadership in adventure programming. 2nded. Champaign, Ill.: Human Kinetics. 328 p.Queenslandtourism. 2008. Queensland adventure tourism action plan 2008-2011. http://www.tq.com.au/fms/tq_corporate/special_interests/Adventure%20Tourism% 20Action%20Plan%202008-2011.pdf Date of access: 20 August 2010.Roadjunky. 2008. A brief history of sex tourism. Newsletter.http://www.roadjunky. com/guide/1614/a-brief-history-of-sex-tourism Date of access: 19 August 2010.Raj, R. &Morpeth, N.D.2007. Religious tourism and pilgrimage management: An international perspective. UK: Biddles LTD. 227p.
Rummel, R.J. 2012. Understanding factor analysis. http://www.mega.nu/ampp/rummel/ufa.htm Date of access: 8 January 2012.Ryngnga, P.K. 2008. Ecotourism prioritization: a geographic information system approach. http://www.sajth.com/07%20article%2010_Iproof.pdf Date of access: 8 January 2012.Saayman, M. 2006. Marketing tourism products and destination: getting back to the basics. 2nd ed. Potchefstroom: Platinum Press. 234 p.Saayman, M., Slabbert, E. & Van der Merwe, P. 2009. Travel motivation: a tale of two marine destinations in South Africa. South African journal for research in sport, physical education and recreation, 31(1):81-94.SAinfo. 2012. A short history of South Africa. http://www.southafrica.info/about/ history/history.htm Date of access: 11 January 2012.Sanz De AcedoLizarraga, M.L., Sanz De AcedoBaquedano, M.T. &Cardelle-Elawar,M. 2007. Factors that affect decision making: gender and age differences.International journal of psychology and psychological therapy, 7(3):381-391.Schneider, P.P., Vogt, C.A. & Smith, S.W. 2006. Segmenting the adventure travel market by activities: an extension of Sun, Morrison and O¡¦Leary. http://www. xolaconsulting.com/TTRA_Final_Paper_Segmenting_Adventure_Jun62006.pdf.Date of access: 25 August 2010.Schott, C. 2007. Selling adventure tourism: a distribution channels perspective. http://justintaillon.com/Schott%20-%20Selling%20Adventure%20Tourism%20-%20Distribution%20Channels%20Perspective.pdf Date of access: 25 February 2012.Schumpeter, P. 2006. Adventure trips. http://www.shumpeter2006.org/blog/ category/favourites/ Date of access: 30 June 2010.Sharpley, R. 2006. Travel and tourism. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage. 232 p.
Shumpes, A. 2002. Women and travel. http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~ulrich/femhist/travel.shtml Date of access: 20 August 2010.Slabbert, E. 2006. Analysing of market segmentation. (In Saayman, M. Marketing tourism products and destinations: getting back to the basics. 2nded. Potchefstroom: Platinum Press. p. 81-110).Soft Adventure Tourism (SAT). 2010. Tips for the out of the ordinary vacation. http://www.soft-adventure¡Vtourism.com Date of access: 10 May 2010.Southpacifictourism. 2005. Motivation, image and determinants. http://nztri.aut.ac. nz/pacifictoolkit/pages/viewpage.php?page=328 Date of access: 10 January 2012.SPSS Inc. 2007. SPSS? 16.0 for Windows, Release 16.0.0. SPSS Inc., Chicago.Squidoo. 2010. Female explorers. http://www.squidoo.com/femaleexplorers Date of access: 19 August 2010.Sung, H. 2004. Classification of adventure travellers: behaviour, decision making, and target markets. Journal of travel research, 42(4):343-356.Sung, H.H., Morrison, A.M. & O¡¦Leary, J.T. 1997. Definition of adventure travel: conceptual framework for empirical application from the provider¡¦s perspective. Asia- Pacific journal of tourism research, 1(2):47-67.Swarbrooke, J., Bread, C., Leckie, S. & Pomfret, G. 2003. Adventure tourism: the new frontier. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann. 345 p.Swarbrooke, J. & Horner, S. 2007. Consumer behaviour in tourism. 2nd ed. Oxford: Elsevier. 428 p.Szabo, C. 2009. Huge pilgrimage arrives at Mount Moria. http://www. digitaljournal.com/article/270804 Date of access: 19 August 2010.
Tabachnick, B.G. &Fidell, L.S. 2001. Using multivariate statistics. 4th ed. Boston, Mass.: Allyn& Bacon. 966 p.Tanner, J.F. & Raymond, M.A. 2012. Principles of marketing. http://catalog. flatworldknowledge.com/bookhub/reader/2030?cid=&e=fwk-133234-chpr Date of access: 9 January 2012.Tourism Market Report. 2010. The George Washington University School of Business, The Adventure Travel Trade Association, and Xola Consulting. 2010 adventure tourism market report. http://www.adventuretravelnews.com/wp-content/ uploads/2010/08/Adventure-Travel-Market-2010FINALAug26.pdf Date of access: 5 October 2011.Travel Industry Dictionary (TID). 2012. http://www.travel-industry-dictionary.com/ nature-based-tourism.html Date of access: 25 February 2012.Traveldictionary. 2012. Define nature-based tourism. http://www.travel-industry- dictionary.com/nature-based-tourism.html Date of access: 8 January 2012.Tustin, D.H., Ligthelm, A.A., Martins, J.H. & Van Wyk, H.J. 2005. Marketing research in practice. Pretoria: UNISA Press. 749 p.Van der Merwe, P. 2009. Adventure tourism. (In Saayman, M. Ecotourism: getting back to the basics. Potchefstroom: Platinum Press. p. 219-247).Van der Merwe, P. & Saayman, M. 2008. Travel motivations of tourists visiting Kruger National Park. Koedoe, 50(1):154-159.Van der Merwe, P., Slabbert, E. & Saayman, M. 2011. Travel motivations of tourists to selected marine destinations. (Proceedings of CMT2009, the 6th International Congress on Coastal and Marine Tourism, 23-26 June 2009, Nelson Mandella Bay, South Africa).Van Harssel, J. 1994. Tourism an exploration. 3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 335 p.
Varley, P. 2006. Confecting adventure and playing with meaning: the adventure commodification continuum. Journal of sport and tourism, 11(2):173-194.Waitt, G., Lane, R. & Head, L. 2003. The boundaries of nature tourism. Annals of tourism research, 30(3):523-545.Wang, K., Chen, J.S. & Chou, S. 2007. Senior tourists¡¦ purchasing decisions in group package tour. Anatolia: an international journal of tourism and hospitality research, 18(1):139-154.Weber, K. 2001. Outdoor adventure tourism: a review of research approaches.Annals of tourism research, 28(2):360-377.Weed, M. 2009. Sport, tourism and lifestyles. Journal of sport and tourism, 14(4): 225-227.Williams, P. & Soutar, G.N. 2009. Value, satisfaction and behavioural intentions in an adventure tourism context. Annals of tourism research, 36(3):413-438.Williams, S. 2009. Tourism geography: A new synthesis. USA: Routledge. 309p.Wood, M.E. 2002. Ecotourism: principles, practices & policies for sustainability. Burlington, VT: International Ecotourism Society. (United Nations Environmental Programme.Division of Technology, Industry and Economics).Woodside, A.G. & Martin, D. 2006. Tourism management: analysis, behaviour and strategy. Wallingford, UK: CABI. 246 p.Wordpress. 2010. What are the adventure travel activities and who is the adventure traveller? http://www.tripadventure.org/blog/outdoor-traveller/   Date of access: 30 June 2010.Yessis, M. 2006. A brief history of adventure travel. http://www.worldhum.com/ travel-blog/item/a_brief_history_of_adventure_travel_20060204/ Date of access: 2 June 2010.
Yolal, M., Etinel, F. & Uysal, M. 2009. An examination of festival motivation and perceived benefits relationship. (EskisehirInternationsl Festival).Journal of convention & event tourism, 10(4):276-291.Zainbooks. 2012. Principle of marketing: consumer buying behaviour. http://www. zainbooks. com/books/marketing/principles-of-marketing_15_consumer-buying- behavior.html Date of access: 10 January 2012.Zaltzman, D. 2010. Adventure travel put at $89 billion global market. http://www. travelmarketreport.com/leisure?articleID=4075&LP=1 Date of access: 25 August 2010.Zuckerman, M. 1990. The psychophysiology of sensation seeking. Journal of personality, 58(1):313-345.
Appendix A

Datum / Date:  	Reis Motiverings van Avontuur Toeriste: Gevalle studie Thaba Metsi Adventures
1. Huistaal?/Home language?	English AfrikaansAnder/Other (Spesifiseer/Specify)2. In watter jaar is u gebore? / In what year were you born?	19	
Travel Motives of Adventure Tourists: Case study Thaba Metsi Adventures
3. Wat is u geslag? / What is your Gender?	Male4. Huwelikstatus?/Marital status ?	Getroud/Married Ongetroud/Not married Geskei/DivorcedWewenaar, Weduwee/Widow/er Woon saam/Living together
Female12345
Navorsing gedoen deur die Instituut vir Toerisme en Vryetydstudies aan die Noordwes Universiteit (Potchefstroomkampus), in samewerking met Thaba Metsi Adventures.Research done by the Institute of Tourism and Leisure Studies at the North West University (Potchefstroom Campus), in collaboration with Thaba Metsi Adventures.
5. Land van herkoms (Indien buite RSA)?/Country of residence (If outside RSA)?	 	6. In watter provinsie is u woonagtig?/	GautengIn which province do you live?	KwaZulu-NatalOos-Kaap/Eastern Cape Wes-Kaap/Western Cape Noord-Kaap/Northern Cape LimpopoMpumalanga Vrystaat/Free State Noordwes/North West7. Dui asseblief u hoogste kwalifikasie aan./	Geen skool/No school Please indicate your highest level of education.	Matriek/MatricDiploma, Graad/Diploma, Degree Nagraads/Post-graduate Professioneel/Professional Ander/Other(Spesifiseer/Specify )
1. Insluitend u self, vir hoeveel persone betaal u in u toergroep?/Including yourself , how many people are you paying for in your travelling group ?
Tel: (+27) 18 299 4140E-mail / E-pos: hanri.ht@gmail.compeet.vandermerwe@nwu.ac.zaKopiereg/Copyright ý
2. Met watter tipe vervoer reis u na avontuur	4x4 aktiwiteite?/ Which mode of transport do you use     Kombito travel to the adventure activities?	Rekreasie voertuig/Leisure vehicleSedan 2x4/Bakkie Ander/Other(Spesifiseer/Specify)
3. Hoeveel keer die afgelope 3 jaar (insluitend die keer) het u aan avontuur actiwiteite deel geneem?How many times have you prticipated in adventure activities( including this one ) in the past 3 years?4. Hoeveel nagte bly u oor by die Avontuur oord?/How many nights are you staying at the adventure resort?5. Wat is die hoofrede waarom u hierdie avontuur oordgekies het? / What is the main reason for choosing this adventure resort?6. Beoordeel volgens die skaal die belangrikheid van onderstaande aktiwiteite / Indicate the importance of the following adventure activities according to prefference.
Kopiereg/Copyright ý7. Beoordeel volgens die skaal waarom u aan avontuur aktiwitiete deelneem (beantwoord asseblief al die moontlikhede) / Rate on a scale of importance why you participate in adventure activities(please answer all possibilities)
Uiters belangrik / Extremely important	5Baie belangrik /Very impportant45Belangrik / Important34Minder belangrik / Less important23Glad nie belangrik / Not important at all121a. Abseil / Abseiling12345b. Voetslaan / Backpacking12345c. Fiets ry / Cycling12345d. Grot kruip / Caving12345e. Staproete / Hiking12345f. Perd ry / Horseback riding12345g. Motorfiets ry / Motorcycling12345h. Boogskut / Archery12345i. Lyfplank ry / Body boarding12345j. Snorkel / Snorkeling12345k. Rotsklim / Rock climbing12345l. Bergfiets ry / Mountainbiking12345m. 4 Wiel motorfiets / Quadbiking12345n. Rek sprong / Bungee jumping12345o. 4x4 Roete / 4x4 Route12345p. Kanoe / Canoeing12345q. Kajak / Kayaking12345r. Skoeba duik / Scuba diving12345s. Branderplank ry / Surfing12345t. Witwater roei / Whitewater rafting12345u. Valskerm spring / Parachuting12345v. Visvang / Fishing12345
 c	
Kopiereg/Copyright ý8. Hoeveel het u tydens u besoek aan die volgende bestee?/ How much did you spend during your visit on the following?1. Akkommodasie / Accommodation	R  	2. Restaurante /Restaurants	R  	3. Kos / Food	R  	4. Drinkgoed / Beverages	R  	5. Tabakprodukte / Tabacco products	R  	6. Klere en skoene / Clothes and footwear	R  	7. Vervoer / Transport	R  	8. Avontuur aktiwiteite / Adventure activities	R  	9. Medisyne / Medicine	R  	10. Aandenkings / Souvenirs	R  	11. Telefoon, faks, Internet / Telephone, fax, Internet	R  	12. Avontuur toerusting / Adventure gear	R  	13. Ander uitgawes nie hierbo vervat nie (Spesifiseer) / Other expenses not listed above (Specify)14.1 R  	14.2 R  	14.3 R  	
3.4. Waar het u van die Avontuur oord te hore gekom (Toon slegs die belangrikste een)?/ Where did you hear about the Adventure resort (Indicate only the most important one)?a. Webwerf/Websiteb. Skoue/ Shows (Getaway)c. Vriende & familie/ Friends & familyd. Radioe. Tydskrifte/ Magazinesf. Vorige besoeke/Previous visitsg. Ander/ Other ( Spesifiseer/ Specify)Kopiereg/Copyright ý
1. Watter van die volgende verkies u wanneer u 'n Avontuur oord besoek?/Which of the following do you prefer when you visit an Adventure resort?2 Watter tydskrifte koop u gereeld? / Which magazines do you regularly buy? a	 b	 c	3.1. Watter koerante koop u gereeld?/ Which newspapers do you buy regularly ? a	 b	 c	3.2 Na watter TV-programme kyk u gereeld? / Which TV programmes do you watch regularly ? a	 b	 c	3.3 Na watter radiostasies luister u gereeld? / Which radio stations do you listen to regularly ? a	 b	
Nie van toepassing/ Not applicable	6Uitstekend/ Excellent5Goed/ Good4Redelik/ Fair3Swak/ Poor2Baie swak/ Very poor1123456a. Terugvoer op telefoon of internet navrae / Response to telephone orinternet queries123456b. Aanwysings / Directions123456c. Professionaliteit gedurende besprekings / Professionality during bookings123456d. Uitleg van internet webtuiste / Layout of internet website123456e. Vriendelikheid en diens van personeel / Friendliness and service of personnel123456f. Administrasie en betalings prosedure / Administration and payment procedure123456g. Veiligheid en instruksie inligting sessie / Safety briefing and instruction session123456h. Gehalte van toerusting wat gebruik word / The quality of gear used123456i. Fasilliteite / Facilities123456j. Informasie gedurende aktiwiteite / Information during activities123456k. Interaksie tussen gidse en deelnemers / Interactions between guidesand particpants123456l. Professionaliteit van gidse / Professionalism of guides123456m. Algemene onderhoud van fasiliteite en toerusting / General maintenance of facilities and gear123456n. Voldoende aktiwiteite by die oord / Adequate facilites at the resort123456ONTVANGS/RECEPTIONo. Inboek/registrasieproses /Check-in process123456p. Inligting rakende attraksies en aktiwiteite by oord/ Information regardingattractions and activities at resort123456q. Vriendelikheid en diens by ontvangs /Friendliness and service at reception123456r. Ontvangs in die algemeen/ Reception in general123456Ja/Yes1Nee/ No2