                      © OCT 2023 | IRE Journals | Volume 7 Issue 4 | ISSN: 2456-8880 

      The Benefits of Mindfulness Meditation for Stress 
                                        Reduction 
                                                 
                                  PROF. DR. PARIN SOMANI 
 Director, Department of Skill Development, London Organisation of Skills Development Ltd, London, 
                                         United Kingdom 
                                                 
Abstract-Over the course of the last several decades, the here and now to sensations and ideas, both internal 
there  has  been  a  meteoric  rise  in  the  amount  of and  external,  without  attaching  any  significance  or 
interest shown in the study of mindfulness both as a meaning  to  those  experiences  and  thoughts.  When 
psychological  construct  and  as  a  method of     practised in the correct manner, mindfulness has the 
therapeutic  intervention.  This  article  provides  an potential to assist improvement in areas of cognition 
overview of the empirical research on the impact that related with openness to experience, objectivity, and 
mindfulness practises have on psychological health. meta-cognitive.  The  practising  of  mindfulness  has 
We  begin  with  a  discussion  of  the  construct  of been linked to an extensive list of health advantages, 
mindfulness,  the differences  between Buddhist and all of which have been demonstrated to be attributable 
Western  psychological  conceptualizations  of      to  the  practise  of  mindfulness.[2] According  to  the 
mindfulness,  and how  mindfulness  has  been       research  that  is  now  available,  mindfulness  training 
integrated  into  Western  medicine  and  psychology. may  be  effective  in  the  management  of  pain 
Next,  we  review  three  areas  of  empirical  research: management  programmes,  the  treatment  of 
cross-sectional,  correlational  research  on  the  depression, and the reduction of somatic disorders, to 
associations  between mindfulness  and  various     name just a few of these potential applications. Despite 
indicators  of  psychological  health;  intervention the growing popularity of mindfulness training in the 
research  on  the  effects  of  mindfulness-oriented field of psychotherapy, there has been a very limited 
interventions; and so on. Our research has led us to amount  of  research  conducted  on  the  topic.  The 
the conclusion that practising mindfulness can have purpose of this study was to disentangle the effects of 
a number of beneficial benefits on a person's psyche, mindfulness  meditation  on  stress-related  symptoms, 
the  most  notable  of  which  are  improvements  in depression-related symptoms, and anxiousness-related 
behavioural  regulation,  reduced  psychiatric      symptoms. 
symptoms,  and  greater  subjective  well-being.  This  
review  comes  to  a  close  with  a  discussion  on  the • Mindfulness Training and Depression 
underlying  processes  of  change  brought  about  by  It  has  been  established  that  engaging  in  regular 
mindfulness therapies, as well as some suggestions  meditation practises can be beneficial in the treatment 
for the next steps in study..                       of  depression.  In order  to  accomplish  this  goal, 
                                                    ruminative  tendencies  are  suppressed  while 
Indexed  Terms- Psychological,  Mindfulness,  Well- improvements  are  made  to  attentional  control. 
Being                                               "Ruminating"  refers  to  the  mental  processes  that 
                                                    individuals go through, such as how they react to the 
           I.    INTRODUCTION                       ideas that they have in their minds. On the other hand, 
                                                    "what's  in  people's  heads"  may  be  viewed  of  as 
It is becoming increasingly common procedure to use dysfunctional  attitudes  and  negative  self-beliefs. 
psychological therapies that are based on mindfulness Because it is a process that "recycles" the unpleasant 
skills  for  the  treatment  of  a  wide  variety  of  mental mental  content,  ruminating  is  associated  with  an 
disorders.  This  type  of  treatment  is  becoming increased  risk  of  a  depressive episode  and  a  more 
increasingly standard technique [1]. Training oneself severe manifestation of the condition in those who are 
in  mindfulness  entails  paying  undivided  attention  in genetically prone to developing depression.  


IRE 1705135          ICONIC RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING JOURNALS                                345 
                      © OCT 2023 | IRE Journals | Volume 7 Issue 4 | ISSN: 2456-8880 

People  who  suffer  from  depression  may  find  relief cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) on the evaluation 
through  meditation  in  two  different  ways:  first,  by of  physiological  symptoms,  cognitive therapy 
increasing awareness of the here and now, depressed instructs  patients  to  view  their  own  thoughts  and 
clients learn to redirect their focus from ruminating on behaviours as recurring patterns.  
negative  self-referential  information  to  attending  to  
and processing all relevant information; and second, • Mindfulness Training and Stress Reduction  
by  allowing  themselves  to  feel  whatever  emotions Training in mindfulness is most commonly thought of 
arise,  meditators  learn  to  minimise  the  impact  that in relation to alleviating stress as a kind of therapeutic 
negative  emotions  have  on  maintaining  maladaptive intervention. Irritability, excessive concern, and over-
thought patterns. A new clinical trial demonstrates that arousal  are  just  a  few  of  the  many  different 
mindfulness-based  cognitive  therapy  is  an  effective physiological and cognitive states that fall under the 
treatment for decreasing symptoms of depression and umbrella term of stress.[5]  
avoiding  the  return  of  the  condition[3].  Even  while  
MBCT  was  not  as  effective  for  everyone  who  was Occupations, illnesses with a grave prognosis, or the 
depressed,  the  great  majority  of  persons  who  had development  of  psychological  problems  can  all  be 
previously  struggled  with  depression  showed     factors in the development of chronic stress. Despite 
considerable  and  long-lasting  improvement  after the fact that they have only been around for a short 
participating  in  the  programme.  On  the  other  hand, while, Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) 
those who have struggled with depression more than  courses  have  already  demonstrated  that  they  are 
twice  are  more  likely  to  be  resistive  to  the  full beneficial in a variety of settings. This is evidenced by 
advantages of treatment since depression is frequently the positive findings of a number of research studies 
triggered by unfavourable living situations. Instruction that have been conducted on the advantages of these 
in Meditation                                       courses.  Mindfulness-based  stress  reduction,  often 
                                                    known as MBSR, was at first developed as a method 
• Mindfulness Training and Anxiety                  of  treating  persistent  pain  in  the medical  field.  The 
 The  practise  of  meditation  is  increasingly  being training is delivered to the participants in small groups, 
included into the treatment of a wide variety of anxiety which typically range in size from 20 to 30 individuals 
issues. The attentional and arousal theories of anxiety each. The typical length of a session is between two 
are  the  primary  drivers  of  the  logic  behind  utilising and  two  and  a  half  hours,  and  it  consists  of  active 
meditation  as  a  treatment  for  anxiety.  (Bogels  & meditation skill training together with discussions on 
Mansell,  2004;  Hunt,  Keogh,  &  French,  2006)   stress  reactions,  directions  for  between-session 
Research  has  shown  that  anxious  people  are  more exercises, and other topics. The duration of the training 
prone to perceive a danger in circumstances and texts typically  ranges from  eight  to  ten  weeks.[6] 
that are ambiguous. People who suffer from anxiety  Participants  in  the  Mindfulness-Based  Stress 
sometimes  have  a  tendency  to  see  ambiguous    Reduction  (MBSR)  course are  given  instruction  in 
information as dangerous.[4] People who suffer from both conventional mindfulness practises as well as an 
severe  anxiety disorders  typically  have  continually exercise that lasts for 45 minutes and is dubbed "body 
elevated  levels  of  arousal,  which  increases  the scan." The participants are instructed to concentrate on 
likelihood  that  these  individuals  would  incorrectly and pay great attention to the feelings that they feel in 
interpret  ambiguous  environmental  information  as different  areas  of  their  bodies. The  'body  scan'  may 
being hazardous. People who suffer from anxiety and have the same outward look as the progressive muscle 
take part in intervention programmes that are based on relaxation method (PMRT), but it does not need the 
meditation  are  taught  to  'observe'  their  thoughts  and conscious  control  of  muscles.  Instead,  the  focus  of 
bodily sensations without passing judgement on them, attention  is  placed  on  the  sensations  that  arise  as  a 
in  a  manner  very  similar  to  those  who  go  through result of the natural functions of the body. 
therapy for depression. An objective acknowledgment  
and investigation of one's physiological issues is the  
initial  step,  and  it  is  also  the  phase  that  is  the  most  
important.  In  contrast  to  the  focus  that  is  placed  in  

IRE 1705135          ICONIC RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING JOURNALS                                346 
                      © OCT 2023 | IRE Journals | Volume 7 Issue 4 | ISSN: 2456-8880 

      II.   OBJECTIVE OF THE STUDY                  obliged to sit in meditation for around two and a half 
                                                    hours  each  week  during  the  duration  of  each class, 
1. To  study  on Mindfulness  Training  and  Stress which may last anywhere from six to twelve weeks. 
  Reduction                                         There were quantitative assessments of the outcomes 
2. To study on Mindfulness Training and Depression  that could be obtained. The dimensions of a person's 
                                                    mental health can be a consequence, or the dimensions 
The rationale that underpins the 'body scan' technique of  their  physical  health  might  be  a  result.  Both  are 
is based on the idea that people who have high levels possible  results.  The  outcome  was  evaluated  using 
of  arousal  and  stress  are  more  likely  to  experience scales  that  had  been  standardised  and  independently 
physiological symptoms (such as muscle tension), and validated by a third party. Impact sizes were able to be 
that  paying  attention  to  these  symptoms  while calculated thanks to the fact that information on each 
maintaining  a  nonjudgmental  frame  of  mind  will trial was freely available.[8] 
reduce these physical responses. This is the reasoning  
that  underpins  the  technique.  When  it  comes  to In  randomised  controlled  trials,  active  techniques  of 
alleviating  stress,  meditating  acts  in  a  way  that  is controlling  for  the  nonspecific  effects  of  the 
cognitively  analogous  to  the  treatment  of  mental mindfulness  group  (such  as  social  support,  demand 
health  illnesses  such  as  anxiety  and  depression. The characteristics, and expectation effects) were chosen 
focus of attention is then brought back to the here and over  passive  ones  (such  as  a  wait-list).  Active 
now when judgemental concepts, such as those about  approaches  included  things  like social  support, 
the reason of stress, are merely noticed for as long as demand characteristics, and expectancy effects.[9] 
they continue to exist, after which it is brought back to  
the  present  moment.  Individuals  who  meditate on  a Data  were  submitted  and  evaluated  following  the 
regular basis experience cognitive shifts as a result of intervention; however, this assessment did not always 
this  exercise  and  grow  in  their  capacity  for  self- include data on any later incidents. 
management  adaptations  as  a  direct  result  of  these  
shifts. The consequences of engaging in this technique • Study coding 
are  multifaceted.  Because  mindfulness training   The second author, LN, was in charge of coding all of 
increases the awareness of all emotional and cognitive the papers that were included in the analysis because 
processes  as  they  occur  in  the  present  moment, they  met  the  aforementioned  inclusion  criteria.  The 
individuals are able to recognise the warning signals studies were analysed and coded in accordance with 
of stress building up because they are able to perceive the following criteria: study design (controlled study, 
them. As  soon  as  a  person  has  gained  the  skills  of' observational study, follow-up data), group allocation 
metacognitive  awareness,'  formerly  difficult  safety (randomization,  quasi experimental),  type  of  control 
behaviours  and  cognitions  become  more  controlled, (waiting list, no treatment, treatment as usual, active 
allowing them to exercise more control over them.[7] control),  study  population  (patients,  nonpatients, 
                                                    students,  inmates,  etc.),  patients' diagnoses,  and 
              III.  METHODS                         outcome measures. After that, the original author (PG) 
                                                    reviewed  all  of  the  code  for  accuracy  a  second 
Not only the processes that were to be followed, but time.[10] 
also the prerequisites for eligibility, could be found in  
the protocol.                                       •  Data selection and extraction 
                                                    Our  purpose  in  doing  this  meta-analysis  was  to 
The objective is to train oneself to become aware of investigate  the  ways  in  which  the  practise  of 
each fleeting moment without attaching any value or mindfulness meditation influenced a variety of health 
importance  to  it.  Instruction  in  many  conventional indicators. When  we  discussed  what  it  means  to  be 
meditation  techniques  will  be  provided.  putting a healthy, we took into account both one's physical and 
focus on the need of regular and consistent practise. mental  well-being.  Everything  that  might  possibly 
Instead of receiving education on an individual basis, have  been  assessed  as  an  outcome  was  either 
group  treatments  were  provided.  Students  were  accounted for within the category of "physical health" 

IRE 1705135          ICONIC RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING JOURNALS                                347 
                      © OCT 2023 | IRE Journals | Volume 7 Issue 4 | ISSN: 2456-8880 

or "mental health," or else it was simply not measured deviation of the data. We used two different kinds of 
at all. In order to collect all of the data for this study, mean  differences:  (i)  the  difference  between  the 
standardised and validated scales were utilised. Some treatment  group  and  the  control  group  (which  is  a 
examples of these scales include the Global Severity difference between the groups), and (ii) the difference 
Inventory  of  Symptom  Check  List—R,  the  Hospital between the posttreatment and the pretreatment group 
Anxiety and Depression Scale, the Beck Depression   (which  is  a difference  within  the  groups).  Because 
Inventory,  the  Profile  of  Mood  States,  the  McGill- there were a very limited number of controlled studies 
Melzack Pain-Rating Scale, the Short Form 36 Health that  fit  the  requirements,  and  numerous  quite 
Survey,  and  the  Medical  Symptom  Checklist. A full thoroughly  done  uncontrolled  observational  studies 
list  of  these  scales  is  available upon  request. that did conform to the criteria, we decided to include 
Measurements  of  egocentrism,  spiritual  experience, the  latter,  within-group  analysis.  In  addition,  we 
empathy, neuropsychological function, social support, thought  that  it  could  be  instructive  to  compare  the 
and the application of a conservative approach were effect  sizes  of  other  types  of  controlled  research, 
not included in the study because of the unknown or including observation studies, randomised controlled 
unconventional character of these factors.[11]      trials, and quasi-experimental controlled trials.[13] 
                                                     
Measures  of  a  person's  ''mental  health''  have In the first scenario, (i), posttreatment data are often 
traditionally included things like the individual's state included into the calculation under the assumption that 
of  mind  and  their  symptomatology;  their  degree  of there  was  no  significant  change  in  the  baseline 
depression,  anxiety,  and  sleep;  their  psychological conditions between the groups before the intervention. 
components  of  quality  of  life;  and  their emotional We generated two effect sizes since it was not possible 
experience of pain. The ideas of "medical symptoms," to constantly maintain this assumption for our data set. 
"physical  pain,"  "physical  impairment,"  and  "the One effect size was based on the pretreatment values 
physical component of quality of life questionnaires" (baseline difference), while the other effect size was 
are  all  examples  of  concepts  that  fall  within the based  on  the  posttreatment  values.  When  the  effect 
"physical health" umbrella.                         size  for  the  postintervention  values  was  subtracted 
                                                    from  the  effect  size  for the  baseline  difference,  the 
Throughout their conversations, LN, PG, and HW (the result was the final effect size that was entered into the 
last author) were able to come to a consensus about the meta-analysis. For the purpose of computing the (ii) 
inclusion and distribution of outcome measures. This pre–post  effect  sizes,  it  is  necessary  to  have  a 
consensus  served  as  the  basis  for  all  choices.  Data correlation between the preintervention measures and 
pertaining to each of the measures that were utilised in the  postintervention  ones[14].  Because  the  study 
the study were extracted and entered into a spreadsheet reports did not provide information that would allow 
created in Excel.                                   us to derive this correlation, we made a best guess and 
                                                    inserted it into the calculation as r =.7. All effect sizes 
Since a large number of studies did not collect follow- were  adjusted  to  account  for  the  potential  bias 
up data and the amount of time that passed between  introduced  by  having  a  small  sample  size  using  a 
post-intervention  evaluations ranged  widely,  we  straightforward calculation that Hedges gave. 
decided to focus our attention on examining the short-  
term  impacts  of  mindfulness  training  rather  than  its • Data aggregation 
long-term advantages.[12] It was essential to carry out After that, we calculated the means of each impact size 
these steps due to the delicate character of the research. to  produce  two  separate  effect  sizes:  one for  mental 
Our  findings  simply  reflect  the  presence  or  lack  of health and one for physical health. Both of these effect 
acute reactions; they do not take into account the long- sizes were then merged into the original research. If 
term repercussions.                                 there  was  a  difference  in  the  sample size  from  one 
                                                    scale of the research to another, we weighted it for N. 
• Effect size calculation                           The  effect  sizes  produced in  this  method  were  then 
To determine the amount of the Cohen's d effect, we aggregated  across  investigations  by  computing  a 
divided  the  mean  difference  by  the  pooled  standard weighted  mean,  where  the  inverse  of  the  estimated 

IRE 1705135          ICONIC RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING JOURNALS                                348 
                      © OCT 2023 | IRE Journals | Volume 7 Issue 4 | ISSN: 2456-8880 

standard deviation for each research acted as a weight Either  they  did  not  cultivate  mindfulness  in  the 
[8]. This allowed the effect sizes to be compared more specified  manner,  or  they  did  not  offer  sufficient 
accurately. The standard error of the total mean effect statistical  information  for  an  effect  size  estimate. 
size was used as the basis for calculating confidence Either way, the results of the study cannot be trusted. 
intervals (CI), which were based on those results.  Patients  suffering  from  fibromyalgia,  mixed  cancer 
                                                    diagnoses,  coronary  artery  diseases,  depression, 
• Overall and sensitivity analyses                  chronic  pain,  anxiety,  obesity  and  binge  eating 
Two independent meta-analyses were carried out, and disorder, as well as psychiatric patients, participated in 
their findings were subsequently combined. In the first research  that  studied  the  effects  of  mindfulness 
analysis, data from all controlled studies were taken training  on  medical  patients.[16] The  other  three 
into  consideration,  and  the  size  of  the  impact  was findings  were  based  on  nonclinical  samples  of 
determined by comparing the two different groups. In individuals who desired to improve their capacity to 
the second analysis, researchers looked at randomised cope with stress. Two of the findings were based on 
controlled  trials  (which  concentrated  largely  on  the populations of inmates, while the other two findings 
benefits  of  the  mindfulness  intervention)  as  well  as were  based on  populations  of  persons  who  were 
observational studies (which did not include a control incarcerated. 
or comparison group). In order to reach a conclusion,  
we pooled together all of the effect estimates that were Table 1 Detailed description of the controlled studies 
derived  from  studies  that  compared  pre-training  and that were incorporated into the meta-analysis. 
post-training  measurements  for  groups  that  had                                            
undergone mindfulness training. In their own research, Sam Diagnosis Desi Control N Nt N M P dM dP
we computed the average impact sizes for both mental ple          gn  group        c  H H H   H 
and  physical  health.  In  order  to  get  the  data  set pat. Chronic QE attention 22 15 7 4 2 0.5 0.7
available for sensitivity analyses for several groups, it pain        placebo              3  5 
was  partitioned,  and  then  separate  analyses  were pris. –    RCT Jacobson 31 15 16 3 – 0.3 – 
performed on each subset of the data.[15]                             relaxatio            0 
                                                                      n 
               IV.   RESULTS                        pris. –       RCT WL      97 49 48 4 – 0.4 – 
                                                                                           9 
We  were  able  to  retrieve  64  research,  but  only  20 stud. – QE seminar 27 12 15 2 – 0.5 – 
reports, with a total of 1605 participants, satisfied the                     7  5 2       4 
inclusion requirements (these reports are marked in the pat. Fibromya RCT WL  55 22 33 4 2 0.6 0.2
References section with an asterisk and in the Further   lgia                 –  – –       7  5 
Readings section; please note that several studies were                       65 27 39 
given in more than one publication). In the appendix, stud. –     RCT WL      73 36 37 4 – 0.6 – 
you  will  find  a  list  of  all  of  the  studies  that  were                            2 
obtained.                                           pat. Cancer   RCT WL      90 53 37 2 – 0.5 – 
                                                                                           4 
A. Most of the excluded studies did not operationalize pat. Fibromya QE social 38 25 13 4 1 0.5 0.3
with  wi  standing  for  the  cumulative  significance  of lgia       supp.,               2  0 
each individual's study. The calculation of two-tailed                relaxatio                
P values involved the application of the formula z =                  n and 
d/SEd to determine a z score, which was then utilised                 exercise                 
in  the  computation  of  the  value.  By  generating  a              group 
formula  that  produces  a  Q  value,  we  were  able  to 
                                                    pat. Coronary RCT stress  21 11 10 8 1 0.4 0.2
conduct an analysis on the homogeneity of treatment 
                                                                      manage               6  9 
effects across  all  of  the  trials.  This  formula  is  v2 
                                                                      ment 
distributed  with  df  = k  1,  where  k  is  the  number of 
                                                         artery dis.  training                 
papers that were considered for inclusion in the test. 

IRE 1705135          ICONIC RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING JOURNALS                                349 
                      © OCT 2023 | IRE Journals | Volume 7 Issue 4 | ISSN: 2456-8880 

vol. –       RCT educatio 47 28 19 2 1 0.5 1.0      The outcomes of randomised controlled trials that are 
                  nal     – –  –      6   1         important to mental health are summarised in Table 2, 
                  material 57 32 26                 which  includes  the  mean  effect  size,  the  95% 
                  given                             confidence interval, and the P value. In the data set that 
                          77 38 38 37 7             is  being  reported  on  here,  there  are  a  total  of  771 
                          1 8  5                    individuals; 388 of those people have participated in 
Pub.  status, publication  status  (dissertation;  u, mindfulness  training.[18] The  outcomes  of  the 
unpublished;  abstract;  p,  published),  sample  (pat., subsamples have also been included in the table that 
patients;  pris.,  prisoners;  stud.;  students;  vol., can be seen below. These outcomes were achieved by 
volunteers), design (RCT, randomised controlled trial; further  subdividing  the  dataset  based  on  the subject 
QE, quasi experimental design); control group (WL,  population  (patients  versus  nonpatients)  and  group 
waiting list control); N, total number of subjects in this allocation  (randomization  versus  qua- experimental 
study; Nt, number of subjects in the treatment group; control).  Only  five  of  the  controlled  trials  really 
Nc,  number  of  subjects  in  the  control  group;  MH, measured anything related to the participants' physical 
number of mental Only participants who finished the health as an outcome. 
study are included in these numbers.[17]             
There are several distinct scales contained within the The factors that were discovered to be connected to 
N, Nt, and Nc ranges.                               mental health were shown to be quite consistent across 
                                                    the board (v2 = 0.89, df = 9, P =.999). The effect size, 
• Controlled studies                                which  was  evaluated as  d  =  0.54  with  a  95% 
Thirteen  of  the  studies  that  had  the  potential  to  be confidence interval ranging from 0.39 to 0.68 and a 
included  conducted  some  kind  of  comparison  group two-tailed  P  value  of.0001,  was  medium-strong  and 
analysis. Because of the constraints described below, statistically significant.  
we  were unable  to  include  the  results  of  three  more  
research  in  our  analysis.  One  piece  of  research Table 2n, brand newAcross all randomised controlled 
compared the efficacy of psychoeducational courses to trials,  the  mean  effect  size,  d,  the  95%  confidence 
that  of  the  practise  of  mindfulness  meditation. intervals, and the two-tailed P values for the difference 
Psychoeducational  programmes  have  a  strong      between  the  mindfulness  meditation  group  and  the 
reputation for being successful. Even while this wasn't control group on mental and physical health markers 
a "control" strategy in the way that we understood that were determined.Choosing three at random to discuss 
term, it was nonetheless a comparative research. On                  k   N   d    95%-CI   P 
the  other  hand,  the  findings  of  this  research  can  be Mental health                 
located  under  the  section  entitled  "Observational variables     10  771 0.54 0.39    – <.0001 
Studies" farther down the page. Two additional studies All studies                0.68 
only offered follow-up information; however, neither Patients        5   236 0.56 0.29    – <.0001 
of  these  studies  disclosed  posttreatment  assessments                         0.83 
within the time range appropriate for our analysis, and Nonpatients  5   535 0.53 0.36    – <.0001 
as a consequence, they were also discarded (these last                            0.70 
two reflect  distinct  outcomes  from  the  same  study). Randomized 7   434 0.54 0.35    – <.0001 
Two  more  studies  only  provided  follow-up                                     0.74 
information.  Randomization  was  carried  out  in  an Quasiexperimental 3 337 0.54 0.32  – <.0001 
appropriate manner in seven of the other ten research,                            0.76 
and a quasi-experimental methodology was utilised in Physical   health                      
three of the studies. In each of the five investigations, variables  5   203 0.53 0.23    – <.0004 
patients were invited to take part as volunteers, and the All studies (4          0.81 
researchers used a wide range of control methods (see patients and 
Table 1).                                            
 


IRE 1705135          ICONIC RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING JOURNALS                                350 
                      © OCT 2023 | IRE Journals | Volume 7 Issue 4 | ISSN: 2456-8880 

Only  for  mental  health  measures  are  subgroups  of the  collection  of  data  included  information  that  was 
research  with  patients,  nonpatients,  randomised acquired from a total of 18 distinct pieces of study. In 
design, and quasi-experimental design indicated. Due total, only nine studies with a combined total of 566 
to the extremely low number of studies that included individuals  were  conducted  to  explore  different 
factors related to physical health, it was not possible to aspects  of  physical  health.  The  outcomes  of  the 
accurately calculate distinct CIs.                  controlled trials gave effect sizes that were reasonably 
                                                    comparable  to  the  mean  effect  sizes  obtained  in  the 
Table  3  presents  the  effects  of  mindfulness  training study that was conducted without any controls being 
based  on  a  pre–post  comparison  for mental  and used. In terms of mental health, these mean effect sizes 
physical  health  variables  (k,  number  of  studies;  N, were d = 0.50 (95%-CI 0.43 – 0.56, P.0001), while in 
number of subjects; d, mean effect size; P value, two- terms of physical health, these mean effect sizes were 
tailed).  There  were  no  significant  differences  found d = 0.42 (95%-CI 0.34 – 0.50, P.0001). The findings 
between the  subgroups  for  the  variables  subject of  the  controlled  studies  produced effect  sizes  that 
population or group allocation.                     were relatively equivalent to the mean effect sizes seen 
                                                    in  the  studies  that  were  not  controlled.[20] The 
Variables k    N     d     95%-CI    P              homogeneity test was failed by the other set (mental 
Mental    18   894   0.50  0.43 – 0.56 P   <        health  v2  =  51.92,  df  =  17,  P.0001);  the  set  with 
health                               .0001          characteristics of physical health was the only one that 
Physical  9    566   0.42  0.34 – 0.50 P   <        was confirmed to be homogenous (v2 = 11.45, df = 8, 
health                               .0001          P  =.18). However,  the  homogeneity  of  the  data  was 
Only five of the controlled studies produced any data only found in the set that comprised variables linked 
that could  even  distantly  be  regarded  to  be  on  topic to  physical  health.  Both  of  the  impact  sizes  are 
with the discipline of physical health. Only five of the significant. 
controlled  studies  produced  any  data.  The  findings  
cover a total population of 203 people, out of which Therefore,  in order  to  determine  if  the  subject 
122 were given instructions on how to participate in population  functioned  as  a  moderator  of  the  impact, 
mindfulness  practises.  This  particular  data  set  was we carried out a sensitivity analysis in order to analyse 
shown  to  be  homogenous  by  utilising  a  sample  size its potential role. To determine whether or not this was 
that  was  somewhat  reduced  from  the  original  (v2  = the case was the primary focus of our investigation. 
4.97, df = 4, P =.29). Table 2 has a summarised version According  to  the  findings,  each  of  the  subgroups, 
of the findings that you are welcome to peruse at your patients and others, possessed a considerable level of 
leisure. This was done for your convenience.[19] This heterogeneity  (patients,  v2  = 33.29, df =  12, P.001; 
effect size is comparable to that of the mental health nonpatients, v2 = 15.84, df = 4, P =.003). Patients had 
factors, and the estimated average impact size was d = a much greater amount of variation compared to other 
0.53  (95%  confidence interval  [CI]:  0.23–0.81,  P individuals. When compared to other persons, patients 
=.0004].                                            had  considerably  higher  levels  of  heterogeneity  in 
                                                    their data. Therefore, extreme caution is essential for 
• Investigations that are based on actual observations determining  the  importance  of  this  mean  impact 
The  findings  of  comparisons  made  between  pre- magnitude. 
intervention statuses and post-intervention statuses for  
both sets of outcome measures (physical and mental  •  Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) 
health)  are  provided  in  Table  3.  These  comparisons The findings of this study suggest that Mindfulness-
were  done  for  the  purpose  of  determining  whether Based Stress Reduction (MBSR), more often referred 
state was better, pre-intervention or post-intervention. to as "mindfulness meditation," has the potential to be 
The comparisons in this study were made between the an effective treatment for a wide variety of persistent 
two  periods  in  time  that  came  before  and  after  the diseases  and  issues.  Mindfulness practise  has  the 
intervention.  In  addition  to  the  experiences  of  894 potential  to  improve  not  just the  general  parts  of 
people who had participated in mindfulness training, coping  with  anguish  and  impairment  in  day-to-day 
                                                    life, but also the more exceptional elements of coping 

IRE 1705135          ICONIC RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING JOURNALS                                351 
                      © OCT 2023 | IRE Journals | Volume 7 Issue 4 | ISSN: 2456-8880 

with  extreme  cases  of  disorder  or  stress.  This  is mindfulness  programme  in  a  recent  randomised 
demonstrated by the consistent and often considerable research  trial of  depressives  who  were  in  remission. 
level  of  effect  sizes  across  a  wide  range  of  sample The study  was  conducted  on  individuals  who  had 
types.  Mindfulness  training  may  also  be  helpful  in previously been diagnosed with depression and were 
managing  with   anguish  and   incapacity  in      currently in a state of remission. The participants in the 
circumstances  that  are  more  severe,  such  as  major research were people who had been given a diagnosis 
disorders or intense stress. This study adds support to of depression in the past but who were now considered 
the theory that training in mindfulness may enhance to be functioning normally. People who had a history 
these  general  features  of  coping  with  adversity  and of undergoing therapy for depression were recruited to 
disability.  In  point  of  fact,  this  discovery  lends take  part in  the  study  as  participants.  People  who 
credence to the hypothesis. Recent study that was only suffered  from  anxiety  and  mood  disorders  and  had 
very recently made accessible provides evidence for participated  in  mindfulness  training  showed 
the  efficacy  of  mindfulness-based  therapy.  This significant  pre-to-postintervention  improvements  in 
research  was  published  not  too  long  ago.  In  this their  mental  health  outcomes,  with  an  effect  size  of 
examination,  new  inclusion  criteria  were  applied,  in 0.70, according to yet another study that looked into 
addition  to  a  technique  that  was  only  marginally the  topic.  These  findings  were  discovered  among 
different  from  the  one  that  had  been  used  in  the individuals  who  had  previously  participated  in 
previous study. In every one of these investigations, mindfulness training.[22] 
there was evidence of benefits across a broad spectrum  
of  standardised  mental  health  indicators.  The  In our meta-analysis, we found that the consistency of 
psychological  components  of  quality  of  life  scores, effect sizes across different types of research (such as 
depression, anxiety, coping style, and other emotional controlled vs observational) and within the controlled-
aspects of disability were among those that improved study  analysis  (active  control  versus  wait  list)  does 
as  a  result  of  these  interventions.  In  a  similar  vein, give  some  support  for  the  intervention's  specificity. 
identical improvements  were  also  reported  for  the This support comes from the fact that these effect sizes 
health  indicators  of  physical  well-being,  such  as were measured using the same criteria in both types of 
medical  symptoms,  sensory  discomfort,  physical  research. For  instance,  controlled  trials  and 
impairment,  and  ratings  of  functional  quality-of- observational studies were able to offer information on 
life.[21] These  findings  are  consistent  with  the effect sizes that were equivalent to one another. The 
findings described in the previous paragraph. Despite fact that the results of both controlled experiments and 
the fact that physically oriented metrics were explored observational research  came  to  the  same  findings 
in the trials as a whole less often than other types of allowed us to provide evidence that this is the case. 
measures, researchers were nevertheless able to detect The six controlled studies (see Table 1) that made use 
the  benefits  associated  with  these  sorts  of   of various types of active control intervention in order 
measurements.                                       to  take  into  consideration  the  effects  of  therapy  that 
                                                    were  either  general  or  nonspecific  are of  particular 
The advantages of mindfulness training have also been significance  to  this  issue.  These  experiments  were 
attested  to  by  the  findings  of  other  high-quality conducted  in  order  to  determine  whether  or  not  the 
research that was carried out by researchers who did effects  of  therapy  were  beneficial.  These  tests  were 
not adhere to our conditions regarding the amount of carried out in order to take into account the effects of 
time involved, the dependent measures, or the control treatment that were not unique to any one patient in 
techniques. Although  these  studies  did  not  meet  our particular.[24] These  trials  suggest  that  the  mean 
requirement regarding timing, they did meet all of our impact size of the intervention is around 0.49, which 
other criteria. In no way were our criteria for timing, is not too far off from and not considerably different 
dependent  measurements,  or  control  techniques   from the mean effect size found in the four wait-list 
implemented  in  any  manner  in  these  trials.  For groups  (d=0.58),  which  did  not  have  control  of  the 
instance,  the  one-year  recurrence  rates  of  major majority of the intervention's nonspecific effects.[23] 
depressive episodes were shown to be cut in half when There is not a large amount of distinction between the 
conventional treatment  was  supplemented  by  a    two. However, one must approach such findings with 

IRE 1705135          ICONIC RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING JOURNALS                                352 
                      © OCT 2023 | IRE Journals | Volume 7 Issue 4 | ISSN: 2456-8880 

extreme  caution  due  to  the  small  number  of  overall yogis. Electroencephalography  and  Clinical 
research and, in particular, randomised trials, the range Neurophysiology. 1961;13:452–456.  
of  different  types  of  sample  diagnoses,  and  the [5] Anderson ND, Lau MA, Segal ZV, Bishop SR. 
inclusion of unpublished studies. All of these factors  Mindfulness-based  stress  reduction  and 
combine  to  make  it  difficult  to  draw  definitive  attentional  control. Clinical  Psychology  and 
conclusions from the available evidence. It is tough to Psychotherapy. 2007;14:449–463.  
make  claims  that  are  conclusive  due  to  all  of  these 
                                                    [6] Arch  JJ,  Craske  MG.  Mechanisms  of 
different elements. Due to the presence of all of these 
                                                        mindfulness:  Emotion  regulation  following  a 
problems, increased attention is necessary.[25] 
                                                        focused    breathing   induction. Behaviour 
 
                                                        Research and Therapy. 2006;44:1849–1858.  
               CONCLUSION 
                                                    [7] Astin JA. Stress reduction through mindfulness 
The current research has a number of methodological     meditation:   Effects   on   psychological 
flaws that need to be solved before it can be considered symptomatology, sense of control, and spiritual 
complete. Our internal and external validity is affected experiences. Psychotherapy           and 
negatively as a result of several factors, including the Psychosomatics. 1997;66:97–106.  
absence  of  a  control  group  design,  statistical [8] Bach  P,  Hayes  SC.  The  use  of  acceptance  and 
regression, and extraneous variables. The size of the   commitment    therapy   to   prevent  the 
results  implies  that mindfulness  training  has  a  good rehospitalization  of  psychotic  patients:  A 
influence  on  the  emotional  states  of  depression,  randomized    controlled  trial. Journal  of 
anxiety,  and  stress,  and  that  it  merits  a  place  in Consulting       and          Clinical 
therapeutic considerations. Despite the fact that these Psychology. 2002;70:1129–1139.  
constraints may restrict the amount to which we can [9] Baer  RA. Mindfulness  training  as  a  clinical 
generalise  from the  current  findings,  the  data  imply intervention:  A  conceptual  and  empirical 
that  mindfulness  training  has  a  positive  effect. As  a review. Clinical  Psychology:  Science  and 
result, the findings presented here should be seen as an Practice. 2003;10:125–143.  
indicator of how mindfulness training could contribute [10] Baer RA, Fischer S, Huss DB. Mindfulness and 
to  the  treatment  of  emotional  disorders,  and  it  is acceptance  in  the  treatment  of  disordered 
recommended  that  any  future  studies  including      eating. Journal  of  Rational-Emotive  & 
community samples take into account the limitations     Cognitive-Behavior   Therapy. 2005;23:281–
discussed in this article..                             300.  
 
                                                    [11] Baer  RA, Sauer  S.  Mindfulness  and  cognitive 
               REFERENCES 
                                                        behavioral  therapy:  A   commentary   on 
                       
                                                        Harrington  and  Pickles. Journal  of  Cognitive 
[1] Alberts  H,  Thewissen  R.  The  effect  of  a  brief 
                                                        Psychotherapy:       An       International 
    mindfulness  intervention  on  memory  for 
                                                        Quarterly. 2009;23:324–332.  
    positively   and    negatively   valenced 
    stimuli. Mindfulness in press.                  [12] Baer RA, Smith GT, Allen KB. Assessment of 
                                                        mindfulness  by  self-report:  The  Kentucky 
[2] Allen NB, Blashki G, Gullone E. Mindfulness-
                                                        Inventory          of          Mindfulness 
    based psychotherapies: A review of conceptual 
                                                        Skills. Assessment. 2004;11:191–206.  
    foundations,  empirical  evidence  and  practical 
    considerations. Australian  and  New  Zealand   [13] Baer RA, Smith GT, Hopkins J, Krietemeyer J, 
    Journal of Psychiatry. 2006;40:285–294.             Toney L. Using self-report assessment methods 
                                                        to         explore        facets       of 
[3] Altmaier E, Maloney R. An initial evaluation of 
                                                        mindfulness. Assessment. 2006;13:27–45 
    a mindful parenting program. Journal of Clinical 
    Psychology. 2007;63:1231–1238.                  [14] Bagchi  BK,  Wenger  MA.  Electrophysiological 
                                                        correlates      of       some        yogi 
[4] Anand BK, Chhina GS, Singh B. Some aspects 
    of   electroencephalographic  studies  in 

IRE 1705135          ICONIC RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING JOURNALS                                353 
                      © OCT 2023 | IRE Journals | Volume 7 Issue 4 | ISSN: 2456-8880 

    exercises. Electroencephalography  and  Clinical    Journal-3,   London    Organisation  Skill 
    Neurophysiology. 1957;(Suppl. 7):132–149.           Development  Ltd,  Vol.  1,  issue  3,  pp.  31-33. 
[15] Barnhofer T, Crane C, Didonna F. Mindfulness-      https://globalresearchjournal.info/https-
    based  cognitive  therapy  for  depression  and     globalresearchjournal-info-publications/ 
    suicidality.  In:  Didonna  F,  editor. Clinical [23] Dr.  Monica  Sharma,  “EFFECTS  OF  THE 
    handbook  of  mindfulness. New  York,  NY:          COVID-19  PANDEMIC  ON  INNER  PEACE 
    Springer; 2009. pp. 221–243                         AND HAPPINESS”, Global Research Journal-3, 
[16] Barnhofer T, Crane C, Hargus E, Amarasinghe        London  Organisation  Skill  Development  Ltd, 
    M,  Winder  R,  Williams  JMG.  Mindfulness-        Vol.    1,    issue    3,    pp.    34-38. 
    based  cognitive  therapy  as  a  treatment  for    https://globalresearchjournal.info/https-
    chronic    depression:   A     preliminary          globalresearchjournal-info-publications/ 
    study. Behaviour      Research       and        [24] Yesican  Pinki,  “EFFECT  OF  JOB  LOSS ON 
    Therapy. 2009;47:366–373.                           THE  MENTAL  HEALTH  OF  EMPLOYEES 
[17] Benson H, Rosner BA, Marzetta BR, Klemchuk         DURING     COVID-19”,    Global  Research 
    HM.    Decreased    blood   pressure   in           Journal-3,   London    Organisation  Skill 
    pharmacologically treated hypertensive patients     Development  Ltd,  Vol.  1,  issue  3,  pp.  12-15. 
    who    regularly  elicited  the  relaxation         https://globalresearchjournal.info/https-
    response. Lancet. 1974:289–291.                     globalresearchjournal-info-publications/ 
[18] Biegel  GM,  Brown  KW,  Shapiro  SL,  Schubert [25] Barsha  Mohini  Das,  “IMPACT  OF  COVID 
    CM. Mindfulness-based stress reduction for the      PANDEMIC  ON  THE  LIFE  OF  ARTISTS”, 
    treatment  of  adolescent  psychiatric  outpatients: Global Research Journal-3, London Organisation 
    A   randomized   clinical  trial. Journal  of       Skill Development Ltd, Vol. 1, issue 3, pp. 16-
    Consulting          and           Clinical          21.     https://globalresearchjournal.info/https-
    Psychology. 2009;77:855–866.                        globalresearchjournal-info-publications/ 
[19] Bishop  SR,  Lau  M,  Shapiro  S,  Carlson  L,          
    Anderson  ND,  Carmody    J,  Devins  G.                 
    Mindfulness:   A    proposed   operational  
    definition. Clinical  Psychology:  Science  and  
    Practice. 2004;11:230–241. 
[20] Dr  Michelle  Nemec,  “REBOOT,  REBOUND 
    AND RECOIL - THE ROLE OF RESILIENCE 
    FOR  INDIVIDUALS  AND  ORGANISTIONS 
    IN  THE  COVID-19  PANDEMIC”,  Global 
    Research  Journal-3,  London  Organisation  Skill 
    Development  Ltd,  Vol.  1,  issue  3,  pp.  22-27. 
    https://globalresearchjournal.info/https-
    globalresearchjournal-info-publications/ 
[21] Prof.  Baliram  N.  Gaikwad,  “Education  During 
    Covid- 19  Pandemic  and  the  Compounding 
    Challenges in India”, Global Research Journal-3, 
    London  Organisation  Skill  Development  Ltd, 
    Vol.    1,    issue   3,    pp.    28-30. 
    https://globalresearchjournal.info/https-
    globalresearchjournal-info-publications/ 
[22] Aditi  B.  Gaikwad,  “COMPREHENDING  THE 
    LINGUISTIC     AND     PSYCHOLOGICAL 
    IMPACT  OF  COVID-19”,  Global  Research 

IRE 1705135          ICONIC RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING JOURNALS                                354 
