                                                                                      HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
                                                                                       published: 09 October 2018
                                                                                     doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00397


                           Breath of Life: The Respiratory Vagal
                           Stimulation Model of Contemplative
                           Activity

                           Roderik J. S. Gerritsen 1,2* and Guido P. H. Band 1,2

                           1Institute of Psychology, Cognitive Psychology, Faculty of Social and Behavioural Sciences, Leiden University, Leiden,
                           Netherlands, 2Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, Leiden University, Leiden, Netherlands

                           Contemplative practices, such as meditation and yoga, are increasingly popular among
                           the general public and as topics of research. Beneﬁcial effects associated with these
                           practices have been found on physical health, mental health and cognitive performance.
                           However, studies and theories that clarify the underlying mechanisms are lacking or
                           scarce. This theoretical review aims to address and compensate this scarcity. We will
                           show that various contemplative activities have in common that breathing is regulated
                           or attentively guided. This respiratory discipline in turn could parsimoniously explain the
                           physical and mental beneﬁts of contemplative activities through changes in autonomic
                           balance. We propose a neurophysiological model that explains how these speciﬁc
                           respiration styles could operate, by phasically and tonically stimulating the vagal nerve:
                           respiratory vagal nerve stimulation (rVNS). The vagal nerve, as a proponent of the
                           parasympathetic nervous system (PNS), is the prime candidate in explaining the effects
                           of contemplative practices on health, mental health and cognition. We will discuss
                           implications and limitations of our model.
                Edited by:
          Yusuf Ozgur Cakmak, Keywords: meditation, mind-body exercises, mindfulness, respiration, vagus nerve, heart rate variability,
  University of Otago, New Zealand cognition, stress
              Reviewed by:
         Antonio Ivano Triggiani,
        University of Foggia, Italy INTRODUCTION
             Thomas E. Dick,
  Case Western Reserve University, The past 50 years have shown an increasing interest in eastern contemplative traditions in
               United States Europe and North-America. These traditions include meditation styles and mindfulness, as well
           *Correspondence: as mind-body exercises like tai chi chuan (TCC) and yoga. What most of these practices have
         Roderik J. S. Gerritsen in common is not only their origin in eastern philosophy and religion, but also the goal to
    r.j.s.gerritsen@fsw.leidenuniv.nl enhance individual physical and mental health. Scientific research has followed the popularity
                           of contemplative activities (ContActs). Figure 1 shows that the cumulative number of relevant
        Received: 03 May 2018 publications since 1945 follows a quadratic pattern, with total number of publications within a
   Accepted: 14 September 2018
     Published: 09 October 2018 decade increasing from 2,412 between 1997–2006 to 12,395 between 2007–2016 (Web of Science,
                           February 2018). The number of clinical trials on meditation, mindfulness, yoga, TCC or qi gong
                  Citation: each year alone increased from a little under 20 in the year 2000 to about 250 in 2014, citations in
     Gerritsen RJS and Band GPH
(2018) Breath of Life: The Respiratory the same timeframe going up from 20 in 2000 to 7,112 in 2014 (Web of Science, February 2018).
       Vagal Stimulation Model of
         Contemplative Activity. Abbreviations: CAN, Central Autonomic Network; ContAct, Contemplative Activity, such as meditation, mindfulness
    Front. Hum. Neurosci. 12:397. and yoga.; FA, Focused Attention meditation; OM, Open Monitoring meditation; PNS, Parasympathetic Nervous System;
   doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00397 rVNS, respiratory Vagal Nerve Stimulation; SNS, Sympathetic Nervous System; TCC, Tai Chi Chuan; VN, Vagus Nerve.


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org 1                          October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                 Breathing in Contemplative Practice

                                                        The most common, the most referenced, the most studied
                                                      and largest subgroup of ContActs is meditation. Most meditation
                                                      traditions come from east and south Asia and are originally
                                                      Buddhist or Hindu  in nature. Zen Buddhist meditation
                                                      (originating in China from a marriage of Buddhism and
                                                      Taoism), loving-kindness meditation (Tibet), vipassana (India)
                                                      and transcendental meditation (India) are popular styles. Yet
                                                      there are also European and Middle-Eastern forms such
                                                      as acem from Norway, Christian monastic traditions (Egan,
                                                      1991; Studzinski, 2009) and Sufi Islamic meditation: muraqaba
                                                      and whirling (Cakmak et al., 2011, 2017; Nizamie et al.,
                                                      2013).
                                                        In an attempt to classify meditation traditions according to
                                                      their differentiated instructions, a distinction has been proposed
                                                      between two types: focused attention meditation (FA) and open
                                                      monitoring meditation (OM, Lutz et al., 2008; Lippelt et al.,
                                                      2014). FA instructions emphasize attention to a particular focus,
 FIGURE 1 | Cumulative number of scientiﬁc publications on contemplative almost always the breath, along with means how to handle
 activity (ContAct), from the 1945–1996 bracket to 2017 per individual year. distractions and refocus attention. Zen meditation is commonly
 Obtained from Web of Science in January 2018 using the search terms: seen as an archetypical form of FA. OM stresses the spreading
 “mindfulness” OR “meditation” OR “yoga” OR “tai chi.” of attention on multiple endogenic and exogenic stimuli, having
                                                      fleeting awareness of multiple sensory modalities, emotions and
  The current article reviews scientific insights in potential thought. Vipassana is popularly regarded as an exemplar of this
health benefits. In particular, we investigate the role of style. There is no strict separation between the two types in zen
particular breathing techniques (low respiration rate, long and vipassana, and most traditions blend one style into the other.
exhalations) integral to contemplative activities and show that Overall, OM is frequently seen as a more advanced level exercise
these techniques are prime candidates in explaining the benefits than FA, and is thus practiced more by experts as compared to
of ContActs for health and mental health. Furthermore, we novices.
provide mechanisms and a neurophysiological model that can In a further categorization attempt by Lutz and colleagues
explain how respiratory patterns produce these effects; through (Dahl et al., 2015; for another three-dimensional classification,
vagal nerve stimulation.                              see Lutz et al., 2015), more meditation styles are classified
  Studies on contemplative practices have reported a plethora based on their most emphasized and practiced techniques.
of positive effects on health, mental health and cognition The resulting framework has three meditation families: the
(for reviews, see Shapiro et al., 2003; Grossman et al., attentional, the constructive and the deconstructive. Both FA
2004; Ospina et al., 2007; Wahbeh et al., 2008; Büssing and OM styles belong to the attentional family. The constructive
et al., 2012; Lee and Ernst, 2012; Forbes et al., 2013). meditations are aimed at improving the well-being of oneself
However, not much literature has been devoted to revealing and others, exemplified by compassion and loving-kindness
the mechanism underlying reported benefits. The current mediation. The deconstructive practices focus on breaking habits
article is intended to fill this gap. Hereby, we hope to of perception, affect, thought and behavior: most mindfulness
give extra incentive for research on the mechanisms of meditation falls in this category. Note however, that the term
ContAct action and inform traditional practices, thereby giving mindfulness has been used in a different meaning as well. It refers
opportunity to innovate styles with new exercises and targeted not only to a category of meditative practice; it can also refer
interventions.                                        to a mental state, or even the ultimate enlightenment goal of
                                                      these practices. As a mental state, mindfulness refers to a state
CONTEMPLATIVE TRADITIONS                              of meta-awareness, in which the practitioner observes emerging
                                                      feelings and thoughts without judgment (non-judgmentality).
For the purpose of this article we define contemplative The state of mindfulness can actually be the target of both FA
activities as activities that involve conscious and attentive and OM exercises.
exercise aimed at changing one’s mental state, contemplation Another subgroup within ContAct, here referred to as
in meaning  comparable to ‘‘praying’’ and ‘‘meditating.’’ mind-body exercises, is more multi-modal. It involves both
We have deliberately not chosen the concept mindfulness meditation and physical exercise; such as stances, positions,
because it is associated with particular practices, instructions complex movements and muscle relaxation techniques.
and states, as we will discuss later. Despite the similarities Common traditions are the many styles of Indian yoga and
between  ContActs reflected in the definition, a few  Chinese styles like TCC and qi gong. Origins of these styles
differences among ContActs are worth explaining here, differ, but most also have religious or mystical roots like
because they are also used to position interventions in meditation traditions, even when developed as a martial art (e.g.,
research.                                             Taoism in TCC).


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org 2                          October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                 Breathing in Contemplative Practice

THE POSITIVE EFFECTS OF ConTact                       (Grossman et al., 2004; Kirkwood et al., 2005; Jahnke et al., 2010;
                                                      Wang et al., 2010a; Keng et al., 2011; Eberth and Sedlmeier, 2012).
Research has found a vast array of beneficial effects in the Furthermore, a recent meta-analysis that collapsed studies using
three domains of physical health, mental health and cognitive different meditation interventions, such as FA and OM, showed
performance.                                          that they reduce multiple physiological stress markers across
                                                      styles: heart rate, blood pressure, cortisol levels and inflammatory
Physical Health                                       bodies (Pascoe et al., 2017).
Cardiopulmonary Effects
                                                      Stress-Related Psychopathology
Multiple reviews on different ContActs report a decrease in
                                                      ContActs, and notably mindfulness-based cognitive therapy,
cardiometabolic risk factors and an increase in cardiopulmonary
                                                      reduce symptoms in affective psychopathology (Chiesa and
health and fitness, according to a meta-analysis this is most
                                                      Serretti, 2011; Kuyken et al., 2015). Most reviews and
consistently reflected in lowered heart rate, blood pressure
                                                      meta-analyses report decrease in symptoms of depression,
and blood lipid profile across practices (Ospina et al., 2007).
                                                      anxiety disorders and post-traumatic stress disorder, as measured
Reviews on separate practices confirm this for meditation styles
                                                      by structured clinical interview and common clinical scales, such
such as mindfulness meditation and transcendental meditation
                                                      as the Beck Depression Inventory (Klainin-Yobas et al., 2012;
(Grossman et al., 2004; Walton et al., 2004), as well as the
                                                      Balasubramaniam et al., 2013; Chi et al., 2013; Cramer et al., 2013;
mind-body exercises yoga (Büssing et al., 2012; Posadzki et al.,
                                                      Kim et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2013).
2014) and TCC (Jahnke et al., 2010; Lan et al., 2013), where
one meta-analysis indicates increased erobic capacity as well Cognitive Performance
(Taylor-Piliae and Froelicher, 2004). However, Cochrane reviews
on transcendental meditation, TCC and qi gong state that even Cognitive Control
though there is suggestion to their positive effect, definitive Some studies show that ContActs enhance executive functioning
conclusions on their efficacy cannot be drawn because of a lack and working memory or act as a buffer against age-related
of high-quality long-term trials (Hartley et al., 2014a,b, 2015). decline of executive functions and working memory: this applies
                                                      to mindfulness meditation (Zeidan et al., 2010; Gard et al.,
Anti-Inﬂammation                                      2013), yoga (Gothe and Mcauley, 2015; Luu and Hall, 2016)
ContAct reviews also report immunological improvements; and TCC (Wu et al., 2013; Wayne et al., 2014; Zheng et al.,
most studies find functional anti-inflammatory effects, where 2015). Most of the reported evidence for ContActs boosting
meta-analyses indicate that the most commonly reported executive functioning comes from cognitive inhibition tasks,
decreases of pro-inflammatory markers are in C-reactive protein such as the Stroop and flanker tasks, whereas the support for
and pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-a working memory improvement comes from span and n-back
(Morgan et al., 2014; Bower and Irwin, 2016). Again, this tasks. Furthermore, cognitive control states can be acutely
enhancement can be seen with different ContActs: loving- affected through very short ContAct interventions (Colzato
kindness meditation (Hofmann et al., 2011), yoga (Black et al., et al., 2012, 2015a,b; Gothe et al., 2013), although these effects
2013) and TCC (Jahnke et al., 2010; Lan et al., 2013). are typically smaller and less robust than following prolonged
                                                      ContAct practice.
Physical Function
Like other physical exercises, mind-body exercises improve Attentional Control
general physical function, most notably bone density, balance, ContActs also seem to have specific effects on attentional
strength and flexibility (Jahnke et al., 2010; Büssing et al., 2012). control and have been reported for FA and OM (Shapiro
Mindfulness-based stress reduction, yoga and TCC seem to et al., 2003; van Vugt and Slagter, 2014; Colzato et al., 2015a),
ameliorate (chronic) pain conditions, as indicated by pain scales mindfulness meditation (Chiesa and Serretti, 2010; Eberth and
in conditions such as: migraine, fibromyalgia and osteoarthritis Sedlmeier, 2012) and yoga (Gothe and Mcauley, 2015), with most
(Grossman et al., 2004; Wahbeh et al., 2008; Büssing et al., 2012). studies reporting enhancement effects on attentional network
As mindfulness-based stress reduction also includes yoga-like task components and the attentional blink. These effects are
exercises, these results can be reserved to mind-body exercises differentiable according to specific practices and can be in
and might best be interpreted as coming from the physical opposite directions (Slagter et al., 2011; Hommel and Colzato,
exercise part of these programs, as exercise-induced analgesia is 2017). For example, practices high in FA are associated with
well-established (Koltyn et al., 2014) and is even comparable to better sustained attention, and those emphasizing OM support
medication in chronic pain conditions according to a review of flexibility in allocation of attentional resources (Lutz et al., 2009;
multiple Cochrane reviews (Geneen et al., 2017).      van Vugt and Slagter, 2014; Colzato et al., 2015a). Jha et al.
                                                      (2007) used the attentional network test (Fan et al., 2005) to
Mental Health                                         compare FA with OM in terms of attentional subcomponents
Stress Relief                                         as distinguished by Posner and Petersen(1990). Jha et al.
Reviewed ContActs decrease stress and negative affect, and in (2007) showed that FA has its effects on the alerting component
parallel increase well-being and self-efficacy, as indicated by stress (detecting a stimulus) and OM on the orienting component
and (trait) anxiety rating scales and quality of life questionnaires (allocating attentional resources). Surprisingly, they found no


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org 3                          October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                 Breathing in Contemplative Practice

differences on performance monitoring. Andreu et al.(2017), as resulting in a shift towards either more or less (attentional)
however, did find acutely enhanced performance monitoring control than as a unidirectional change. Both directions of
by meditation. In people diagnosed with attention deficit change can be adaptive to the practitioner’s intention because
hyperactivity disorder, meditation and mind-body exercises such metacontrol shifts result in either more persistence or more
actually enhanced attentional functioning (Rubia, 2009; Mitchell flexibility in thought (Hommel, 2015; Hommel and Wiers, 2017).
et al., 2015; Herbert and Esparham, 2017), although an earlier A limitation to the effective strength of attention training is
Cochrane review was unable to draw conclusions due to a lack of that transfer of effects to other contexts and untrained skills
clinical trials (Krisanaprakornkit et al., 2010).     is known to be rather limited (Seitz and Watanabe, 2005;
                                                      Green and Bavelier, 2012; Keshavan et al., 2014; Simons et al.,
Global Cognition and Creativity                       2016).
Attention and control are not the only psychological outcome
variables of ContAct research. Shapiro et al.(2003) observed Affect Training
enhanced creativity through transcendental meditation, while Exercises we define as affect training are aimed at removing
the meta-analysis of Ospina et al.(2007) indicated increased or transforming negative emotions or moods. These start with
verbal creativity as the most reliable cognitive outcome of diverse becoming aware and paying attention to negative feelings or
ContActs. However, these acute effects can be in different and thoughts. This is comparable to exposure therapy (Hölzel et al.,
even opposing directions, as shown by a study on convergent 2011b). Subsequent instructions serve to modify the mental state.
and divergent thinking that used short FA and OM interventions By decentering the meditator attempts to distance the self from
(Colzato et al., 2012). There is also evidence that global cognitive the (negative) thought or feeling, trying to observe it as just
functioning, as measured by the mini-mental state examination a fleeting and subjective sensation, instead of a feeling that is
or activities of daily living questionnaire is positively influenced taken personal, in effect trying to detach the observer from the
by ContAct in aging populations with mild cognitive impairment observed (Bernstein et al., 2015). Associated with decentering
or dementia. Studied ContActs include mindfulness meditation is the attempt to treat thoughts and feelings as not necessarily
(Eberth and Sedlmeier, 2012) and yoga and TCC (Wu et al., representing an objective reality. This is known as dereification.
2013), as evidenced by a Cochrane review (Forbes et al., 2013). Finally, the detachment that results from decentering and
                                                      dereification helps the meditator to avoid judgment about
EFFECTIVE FACTORS IN ConTActs                         invasive and recurring thoughts, feelings or external events, such
                                                      as surrounding noise. This non-judgmentality is also explicitly
As a first step towards explaining the highly overlapping effects instructed. Taking these three mental exercises together, it is easy
of diverse ContActs on physical, mental and cognitive health, to maintain that they can help to reappraise negative feelings
a straightforward approach is to analyze what they have in (Hölzel et al., 2011b). Therefore, affect training, as comprising
common. Three of the common factors we distinguish were also both exposure and reappraisal, could explain findings in the area
proposed by Hölzel et al.(2011b) for mindfulness mediation, of mental health, and possibly by extension, through (chronic)
but we formulate them in terms of activities rather than goals stress reduction: immune function and cardiovascular health.
and propose three additional factors: attention training, affect
training, metacognitive adjustment, body awareness training, Metacognitive Adjustment
physical exercise and the central addition: breathing techniques. Both the decentering and dereification techniques belong to
The first three can be seen as forms of mental training and the the domain of meta-awareness and metacognition: being aware
last three as more embodied cognitive exercises. We will cover the of awareness, thinking about thinking (Flavell, 1976). By
first five factors and other proposed models before we introduce metacognitive adjustment practitioners try to change the way
the breathing exercises.                              they process information. Many thoughts and perceptions follow
                                                      a default processing route, resulting in a default interpretation
Attention Training                                    and categorization of what is perceived. ContActs that involve
The focus of attention in ContAct practices can involve many thought monitoring try to identify and deconstruct fixed thought
sensory or cognitive modalities; any of the external senses, pattern, thereby deviating from this default processing route.
the body, the breath, thoughts or feelings. Although explicit This effect may transfer to daily life in the form of a tolerance
attentional training might be absent from some mind-body for ambiguity and an increase in mental flexibility. As such,
exercises, many ContActs are aimed at sustaining attention, some forms of ContAct can be seen as executive function
handling distraction and refocusing or shifting and spreading training, possibly transferring to situations where overruling
of attention. These attentional techniques can explain the pre-potent responses, ignoring irrelevant information, switching
frequently reported effects on attention and perhaps some in between tasks and rules, or keeping working memory up to
the cognitive control domain. However, as stated earlier, these date is relevant. Therefore, metacognitive strategies can explain
effects can be differentiated and in opposite directions according beneficial effects of ContAct in the cognitive control domain.
to specific instructions, showing increased sustained attention However, even apparently very similar cognitive training or
and decreased attentional flexibility by one manipulation (FA), gaming paradigms show very little transfer of training attentional
and showing opposed functional differences by another (OM). control or working memory (Green and Bavelier, 2012; Melby-
Attention training in ContAct might thus be better described Lervåg and Hulme, 2013).


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org 4                          October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                 Breathing in Contemplative Practice

Body Awareness Training                                 Models that describe the benefits of mind-body exercises
Exercises instructing for attention to different parts of the body, (Wayne and Kaptchuk, 2008; Gard et al., 2014; Clark et al.,
mostly to the skin and muscles, but also the viscera, make up the 2015) incorporate movement, mindfulness and attention. One
body awareness training factor. These could be mistaken as being refers to TCC as ‘‘meditative movement,’’ clearly naming the
part of the attention training factor. However, body perception two aspects of physical and mental training (Larkey et al., 2009).
is also uniquely central in affective processing and the sense of However, despite labeling movement as a functional component,
self (Damasio, 2003; Ochsner et al., 2004; Araujo et al., 2013). none of these models handle physical exercise as a full factor on
Some researchers even theorize that body awareness is central its own. In the component ‘‘movement,’’ exercise is reduced to
in the cultivation of empathy (Grossman, 2014). This makes us motor coordination and skill learning, or the training of physical
treat body awareness as a factor on its own. Kerr and colleagues strength. Even though TCC is classified as mildly erobic (Chang
(Kerr et al., 2008, 2011, 2013; Kemp and Quintana, 2013) have et al., 2010), the benefits of its erobic aspect are neglected. This
shown that interoception can be enhanced in practitioners of is peculiar in light of the extensive support for the contribution
mindfulness meditation and TCC: tactile acuity goes up, and of erobic exercise to physical health, mental health and cognitive
activity in related somatosensory and visceral cortical areas (S1, performance.
insula, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)) shows a pattern of
increased attention to specific body parts on instruction and Breathing Techniques
filtering of irrelevant somatosensory information. They state Two of the mind-body models also incorporate a factor that
that metacognition and cognitive enhancement starts in the has been conspicuously absent from other models: breathing
body: somatosensory exercises are in their view early versions techniques (Wayne and Kaptchuk, 2008; Gard et al., 2014). In
of the techniques involved in attention, meta-awareness and both of these accounts, one on yoga and the other on TCC,
metacognition. This being the case, body awareness could be the breathing type described as effective is slow, deep and
involved in producing effects on emotional and cognitive levels. diaphragmatic.

                                                      Effects of Respiration in Theory and Research
Physical Exercise                                     The breathing techniques used in ContAct include, but are
One could argue that physical exercise is the most likely candidate not restricted to, slowing down respiration cycles, shifting
for broad enhancement. Many studies provide evidence that to longer exhalations compared to inhalations, shifting the
physical exercise of different kinds (erobic, endurance, strength) main locus of respiration from the thorax to the abdomen
is a strong cognitive control enhancer, resulting in better (diaphragmatic breathing), or paying attention to ‘‘natural’’
cognitive and response inhibition, and lower dual-task costs, breathing. Especially slow and deep breathing with emphasis
though reviews on working memory performance are mixed on long exhalation is dominant across traditions, including zen
(Colcombe and Kramer, 2003; Smith et al., 2011; Roig et al., and vipassana—though there are a few practices stimulating
2013; Voelcker-Rehage and Niemann, 2013; Voss et al., 2013; faster respiration patterns (i.e., the yoga technique ‘‘breath of
Berryman et al., 2014; Wong et al., 2015). Exercise is also fire’’). In the physically active mind-body exercises respiration
generally accepted as a cardiovascular health booster (Di can be synchronized with movement techniques; moving with
Francescomarino et al., 2009; Heran et al., 2011; Korsager the breath. For example, in some TCC styles moving towards
Larsen and Matchkov, 2016). However, the evidence for the the body is performed on inhale and moving outward on exhale.
supposed therapeutic effect of physical exercise on depression, Note that in yoga, qi gong and TCC moving is performed slowly,
anxiety and other stress-related conditions has been sparse, as and thus so is the breathing cycle.
indicated by a Cochrane review (Mead et al., 2009), despite Although the word breathing is frequently mentioned in the
high expectations and invested resources (Salmon, 2001). Most scientific literature on ContAct, this is almost exclusively done
importantly, only a small minority of the reported ContActs in a purely descriptive and not an explanatory fashion. Indeed,
provide any erobic or endurance exercise quality: the mind-body research on breathing as a ContAct mechanism is sparse, though
exercises, and perhaps to a smaller degree the mindfulness-based there are concrete physiological grounds to look at breathing as
clinical programs (i.e., mindfulness-based stress reduction). This an effective factor (Brown and Gerbarg, 2005). As far as we know
seems to rule it out as the prime candidate.          there are only a few articles looking at respiration in the context
                                                      of ContActs directly, varying wildly in aims and measures.
Theories and Models of ContAct Efﬁcacy                Danucalov et al.(2008) found increases in metabolism and
There is a large gap between the amount of research done oxygen uptake during yogic breathing exercises (pranayamas)
on ContAct and the number and amount of detail of models in experts, as compared to rest and meditation conditions in
proposed to explain the benefits (Schmalzl et al., 2015). (Neuro) a within-subjects design. The breathing exercises used included
cognitive models that have been put forward so far attribute holding the breath and extending exhalation. A similar slow
the benefits of meditation to top-down factors such as attention breathing pranayama was used by Pramanik et al.(2009)
and metacognition. For example, Vago and Silbersweig(2012) showing reduced blood pressure and heart rate at post-measure.
emphasized the role of the self in the effectiveness of mindfulness Brown and Gerbarg(2009) reviewed their own studies on the
meditation, whereas Sperduti et al.(2012) highlighted the role of psychophysiological effects of various breathing techniques used
executive functions in all branches of meditation.    in Sudarshan Kriya Yoga and reported a general tendency


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org 5                          October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                 Breathing in Contemplative Practice

among the breathing exercises towards relaxation: activating functional effects associated with ContAct practice. Therefore,
the parasympathetic nervous system (PNS) and deactivating the the breathing exercise component of ContAct is a prime
sympathetic nervous system (SNS). Cysarz and Büssing(2005) candidate mechanism behind the beneficial effects found on
observed increased cardiorespiratory synchronization with a mental and physical health.
slow breathing zen meditation intervention in naïve subjects.
Though there is clearly a lack of studies on breathing in ContAct Cardiopulmonary Control
practice, fundamental neurophysiological studies on respiration Efferent VN fibers innervate the heart and the lungs. The
mechanics and styles do abound.                       pulmonary efferents regulate airway size and thus volume, they
  In several studies respiration types have been manipulated in lower respiration rate and indirectly endocrine secretion (Yuan
an attempt to influence autonomic nervous system functioning. and Silberstein, 2016a). Exhalation is under direct control of VN
A  study of the effect of diaphragmatic relative to normal (Chang et al., 2015), whereas VN activity is attenuated during
breathing on metabolism among male cyclists, before and after a inhalation (Eckberg and Eckberg, 1982; Canning, 2006). The
meal found reductions in heart rate and glycemia, and increases vagal cardiac outputs to the sinoatrial node causes slowing of
in insulin (Martarelli et al., 2011). Bernardi et al.(2001) induced heart rate, whereas SNS innervation is responsible for heart rate
hypoxia in participants and found that slow breathing exercises increase. The SNS cardiac effector is under tonic inhibition of
not only increased blood oxygenation, but also down-regulated VN, indicating indirect control on heart rate increase (Olshansky
SNS activity. Similar results are reported by Critchley et al. et al., 2008).
(2015) study on hypoxia. Many other studies show that slow Anti-Inﬂammation
and diaphragmatic breathing increases PNS activity, as measured There is evidence that VN also influences physical health
by blood pressure, heart rate or heart rate variability (HRV; by suppressing inflammation. An anti-inflammatory reflex,
Hirsch and Bishop, 1981; Lee et al., 2003; Pal et al., 2004; Lehrer known as the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway has
and Gevirtz, 2014; Van Diest et al., 2014; Mortola et al., 2015; been put forward from findings in animal studies on rats
Perciavalle et al., 2017; Tavares et al., 2017; for some conflicting (Tracey, 2002, 2007; Pavlov and Tracey, 2015). This response
results see and Montgomery, 1994; Conrad et al., 2007). In sum, is thought to inhibit a cascade of inflammatory activity and
experimental slowing of respiration seems to shift the balance is triggered by vagal afferents monitoring immune status.
between SNS and PNS activity towards the latter. Next, in light However, an alternative sympathetic anti-inflammatory reflex
of these findings, we will look at the part of the nervous system has been proposed, explaining conflicting results in rat studies:
responsible for such a shift: the vagus nerve (VN) and measures the splanchnic anti-inflammatory pathway, where VN plays an
of its tone (i.e., HRV).                              afferent role at most (Bratton et al., 2012; Martelli et al., 2014a,c,
                                                      2016). A complete discussion of these competing pathways lies
THE VAGUS NERVE AND HEART RATE                        outside the scope of this review. Suffice it to say that the VN
                                                      seems to be involved in anti-inflammation in humans: studies
VARIABILITY                                           using VN  stimulation paradigms report anti-inflammatory
                                                      effects as well (Browning et al., 2017; Johnson and Wilson, 2018).
Vagus Nerve                                           Furthermore, after vagotomy inflammatory activity goes up. This
The autonomic nervous system (Langley, 1903) is a dual-system resembles the earlier mentioned tonic inhibition on heart rate
divided in the SNS and PNS with mutual inhibitory connections, (Borovikova et al., 2000). This merits the proposition that VN
though the dual innervation can also work complementary in mediates effects of ContAct on immunological health, specifically
organs such as the heart (Jänig et al., 1983; McCorry, 2007). anti-inflammatory, and potentially those on auto-immune
The SNS is responsible for the fight/flight mode of organisms. diseases.
It raises heart rate, blood pressure and indirectly respiration
rate. It dampens currently irrelevant homeostatic processes, but System State Monitoring
stimulates immediate availability of energy. The PNS acts as an VN afferents reach the medulla from the heart, airways, liver and
opposing force. It is the rest/digest system of the organism. It gastrointestinal track. It monitors cardiorespiratory, endocrinal
lowers heart rate, respiration rate and increases digestion. The and immune parameters (Berthoud and Neuhuber, 2000).
VN is the main affector and effector of the PNS.      Mechanoreceptors in the airways signal on airway size and thus
  The VN is a cranial nerve complex with widespread afferents on respiration cycle and style (Undem and Carr, 2001; Canning,
and efferents on glands and visceral organs (Berthoud and 2006). VN afferents on the adrenal glands relay information
Neuhuber, 2000), consists of approximately 20% efferent and on the release of stress hormones, such as epinephrine and the
80%  afferent fibers (Agostoni et al., 1957) and has many glucocorticoids (Coupland et al., 1989; Niijima, 1992; Kessler
independently operating functions (Chang et al., 2015). Overall et al., 2012). The afferent branch of the VN constantly send up
it is well-suited for relaying relaxation from the central nervous homeostatic parameters to the CNS, monitoring the state of the
system (CNS) to the body and checking the arousal and visceral system. This branch has been characterized as the ‘‘great
homeostatic state of the viscera. VN activity is modulated by wandering protector’’ (Andrews and Lawes, 1992).
respiration. It is suppressed during inhalation and facilitated Clearly, these functions all move the system towards the
during exhalation and slow respiration cycles (Chang et al., rest/digest mode of operation and away from fight-or-flight. Not
2015). Efferent and afferent VN functions overlap with the only does VN control heart rate and slow deep breathing, slow


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org 6                          October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                 Breathing in Contemplative Practice

respiration rates with extended exhalation could also activate As stated earlier, HRV is regarded as an indicator of physical,
the PNS by VN  afferent function in the airways. This is a but also cognitive health. Indeed, there is a concrete link
form of respiratory biofeedback. Slow breathing techniques between HRV and cognition, first sketched in the neurovisceral
with long exhalation will signal a state of relaxation by VN, integration model of Thayer and Lane(2000).
resulting in more VN activity and further relaxation. Though
VN involvement can explain effects on health and mental health, HRV and Cognition
the link with cognition is less clear. One of the links between The neurovisceral integration model (Thayer and Lane, 2000;
respiration and cognition is HRV.                     Thayer, 2007; Thayer et al., 2009) posits bi-directional cortical
                                                      influences on autonomic functioning and integrates CNS and
HRV                                                   autonomic functioning. It builds on the work of Benarroch
Vagal Tone                                            (1993, 1997) on the Central Autonomic Network (CAN), a
HRV, the fluctuations in beat-to-beat intervals of the heart, network of brain areas for goal-directed behavior involved
has been related to VN and some measures are believed to in modulating the viscera. These areas are mostly limbic
reflect ‘‘vagal tone.’’ As only the VN cardiac output and not the and include the insula, ACC, amygdala and hippocampus.
sympathetic innervation would be able to produce rapid changes The neurovisceral integration model extends this to prefrontal
in heart rate. HRV is used as an indicator for individual physical structures (orbitofrontal, medial and lateral PFC). These regions
conditioning, general health, reactivity to and recovery from high are able to influence HRV and initiate endocrine responses
stress levels. Higher HRV is related to lower stress levels, better through the VN. But the integration of CNS and autonomic
health and disease outcomes (Thayer et al., 2012). A frequently nervous system also works bottom-up: projections from VN
used HRV metric to assess vagal tone is the respiratory sinus afferent medular termini reach limbic and cortical regions,
arrhythmia, by some maintained to be the best reflection of vagal affecting cognitive control. This framework provides a basis for
tone (Porges, 2001, 2007). This refers to the acceleration of heart a connection between executive functions on the one hand, and
rate during inhalation and deceleration during exhalation. body relaxation on the other. Indeed, studies by Thayer and
  HRV can either be obtained in the time or the frequency others show evidence of a positive association between HRV
domain (Task Force, 1996; for a recent review of HRV methods and PFC activity and subsequent improvements in executive
see: Laborde et al., 2017). High frequency HRV (HF), also functions, notably cognitive inhibition. PFC seems to exert tonic
referred to as respiratory sinus arrhythmia, is seen as a measure inhibition on heart rate (and the amygdala), and greater activity
of vagal tone, whereas low frequency HRV (LF) is thought of the PFC is associated with higher HRV (Lane et al., 2001,
to represent sympathetic activity. The ratio between the two 2009). Hansen et al.(2003, 2004) provided further evidence of
(LF/HF) represents autonomic balance, where a smaller number this relation in individual differences studies: higher HRV is
indicates vagal dominance. However, studies have shown that associated with better executive functions and working memory
vagal activity is also reflected in LF and furthermore that LF performance. In the view of Thayer and colleagues, HRV
does not reflect the SNS (Martelli et al., 2014b), making the ratio can be seen as a peripheral index of the adaptability of the
unusable as an indicator of autonomic balance. Currently, most nervous system and thus the organism. HRV increases with
studies confirm that specific measures in the time domain (e.g., goal-directed behavior and emotion regulation, and reduced
root mean square of successive differences, peak-valley method) HRV is indicative of cognitive stress. Clearly, the CAN and these
best reflect vagal tone (Penttilä et al., 2001), though some experimental findings give grounds for explaining executive
studies state that HRV, notably respiratory sinus arrhythmia, function enhancement following ContActs as originating from
is not a reliable indicator of vagal tone at all (Grossman and VN, through upward projections producing functional and
Taylor, 2007). Individual HRV varies widely through time and structural changes in the executive network.
during various activities, such as physical exercise (Hottenrott In a recent update of the neurovisceral integration model
et al., 2006). Three types of measurements in time can be (Smith et al., 2017), which adopts a hierarchical network
defined: resting or baseline HRV, reactivity HRV and recovery architecture, the relative weight of top-down and bottom-up
HRV (Laborde et al., 2017). Resting HRV is obtained with the influences can be adjusted. This leaves room for learning or the
participant sitting down, not performing any specific activity and training of autonomic responses. For example, a non-adaptive
can be seen as an individual’s baseline level. Reactivity HRV is dysfunctional stress response can be modulated or go extinct
obtained during an activity or intervention, such as a cognitive by the reappraisal of threat (top-down) or exposure to the
task or a breathing exercise. This short-term HRV tends to drop stressor (bottom-up). This means that stress levels could be
during a cognitive challenge (Wood et al., 2002). Recovery HRV downregulated by lower level state feedback that is associated
refers to the return to baseline afterwards. In this article, when with unthreatening situations. In our account these are the
we mention HRV we refer to resting state HRV measures that pulmonary parameters: low respiration rate and long exhalation.
best reflect vagal tone (HF and aforementioned time-domain
measures), unless stated otherwise. Changes in these measures Vagal Nerve Stimulation
thus reflect changes in tonic vagal tone. An exception consists of The many functions of VN have led researchers and clinicians to
most of the reported studies on respiration patterns: in this case develop electrical or behavioral intervention techniques for VN
the HRV concerns reactive HRV and in some cases recovery, and stimulation (VNS). These techniques are promising for clinical
thus phasic changes in vagal tone.                    application and for improving cognitive performance. At the


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org 7                          October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                 Breathing in Contemplative Practice

same time, the pattern of results observed following VNS mirror tone HRV measures (Ylikoski et al., 2017). Neuroimaging studies
those obtained by ContAct, making VN involvement likely, and have also shown that cortical and sub-cortical regions identified
thus breathing exercises a promising candidate for stimulation. in CAN are activated during both cervical and auricular tVNS
                                                      (Dietrich et al., 2008; Frangos et al., 2015).
Electrical VNS                                          Few studies have been conducted using tVNS to influence
Electrical VNS (Henry, 2002; Groves and Brown, 2005; Yuan and cognitive behavioral performance. However, two studies have
Silberstein, 2016b) was originally used to treat epilepsy. However, shown phasic changes in associative memory (Jacobs et al., 2015)
because it also increased the mood of stimulated patients it found and in response selection (Steenbergen et al., 2015) following
its way as an approved therapy for depression (Johnson and tVNS. Interestingly, tVNS also causes effects that would be
Wilson, 2018), especially treatment resistant depression (Müller expected if VN efferent function would be modulated, by
et al., 2018). It is also used to treat cardiovascular disease (Das, increases in vagal tone. Multiple studies and reviews show an
2011; Johnson and Wilson, 2018) and as mentioned earlier, increase of PNS activity, and some also show a decrease of
VNS has also shown acute anti-inflammatory effects (Browning SNS activity (Popov et al., 2013; Clancy et al., 2014; Murray
et al., 2017; Johnson and Wilson, 2018), possibly through the et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2016). Furthermore, tVNS is also
anti-inflammatory pathway (Borovikova et al., 2000; Yuan and associated with anti-inflammatory effects (Wang et al., 2014,
Silberstein, 2016c).                                  2015). These results overlap strongly with those obtained in
  VNS is also applied to respiratory conditions. A study ContAct studies.
on  guinea pigs has shown that strength of stimulation
makes a difference: high voltage produces the predicted VN Behavioral VNS
effects bronchoconstriction, reduced heart rate and blood There are also behavioral forms of VNS (vagal maneuvers),
pressure, while low voltage only produces the pulmonary effects which are supposed to stimulate VN bilaterally. The Valsalva
(Hoffmann et al., 2012). Studies in humans, in contrast, show that technique; pinching the nose closed and then trying to exhale
VNS can actually produce airway relaxation in asthma patients through the nose, is best known for returning normal pressure
during acute episodes, as indicated by an increase in forced to the inner-ear cavities when changing altitudes (Arnold, 1999).
expiratory volume (Miner et al., 2012; Steyn et al., 2013). In other It is initiated by flexing the abdominal muscles and extending
words: stimulating afferent branches of VN during exacerbations exhalation (in clinical or laboratory setting by blowing into a
(shortness of breath) produces longer exhalations and therefore balloon), showing a strong similarity with breathing techniques
slowing of respiration rate.                          in ContAct. Even further, extending, slowing and holding
  VNS has been shown to affect cognitive functioning, for respiration are all considered vagal maneuvers on their own,
example memory consolidation and recognition (Clark et al., stimulating the VN. All of these vagal maneuvers have been
1999; Ghacibeh et al., 2006; Vonck et al., 2014). Effects shown to slow heart rate (bradycardia). We propose that the
found on mood and memory can be interpreted through   breathing exercises of ContAct might be seen as a form of
the vagal projections into the central autonomous network. behavioral VNS.
It is also supposed that by vagal projections to the locus Overviewing the functions and applications of VN, one can
ceruleus, norepinephrine levels are influenced in midbrain see its potential as a mediator between respiratory patterns
and forebrain structures. This proposition is paradoxical as employed in ContActs and the reported effects on health, mental
norepinephrine increase is more associated with sympathetic health and cognition. This will be further outlined in our
than with parasympathetic activity, and indeed evidence for model.
norepinephrine release by VNS is mixed (Ventura-Bort et al.,
2018). We propose that VNS actually increases PNS activity and THE RESPIRATORY VAGAL STIMULATION
that norepinephrine projections play a minor role, as shown by MODEL OF CONTEMPLATIVE ACTIVITY
recent neuroimaging studies (Frangos et al., 2015). Clearly, VNS
not only shows effects on well-documented afferent and efferent The model, as depicted in Figures 2A–D, has a number of
functions of VN, but also fits with the neurovisceral and CAN assumptions, inductions and predictions. These can be roughly
account of cortical VN projections.                   divided into: (a) ContAct breathing; (b) respiratory stimulation;
                                                      and (c) long-term effects. This will be followed by a definition of
Transcutaneous VNS                                    terms and measures.
Transcutaneous VNS (tVNS) is a new non-invasive tool that
is used to electrically excite the auricular or cervical branches ContAct Breathing
(afferent) through electrodes placed on the ear or neck. Though ContActs are multi-modal interventions that can incorporate
this line of research is in its infancy, preliminary results also show many different techniques and instructions. However, one of the
an association between tVNS and VN-related afferent functions most prominent and common ContAct techniques is respiratory
and projections. Shiozawa et al.(2014) concluded from a review regulation, in other words: breathing exercises. These breathing
of neuropsychiatric studies that tVNS can reduce symptoms of exercises have in common the instructions to focus on and
depression. Furthermore, a recent study has shown that (cervical) slow down respiration, and/or extend exhalation. In Figure 2
tVNS indeed shifts autonomic balance from the SNS to the PNS this is represented by the node ‘‘breathing regulation’’ inhibiting
in tinnitus patients, as indicated by the increase of multiple vagal the nodes for respiration rate and inhalation/exhalation ratio,


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org 8                          October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                 Breathing in Contemplative Practice


 FIGURE 2 | Panel (A) represents an overview of the respiratory vagal nerve stimulation (rVNS) model of ContAct. See the text body for more details. There are two
 pathways through which respiration style stimulates VN: direct and indirect (biofeedback through afferent projections), shown in (B,C) respectively. (D) The tonic
 changes in the networks and the long-term effects. Color coding: red = VN, blue = other anatomy, purple = physiology, green = function, dark blue = direct route,
 orange = indirect route. Arrow-ends represent role: triangle = activating or increasing, circle = deactivating or decreasing, bladed = structural increase,
 ellipsis = structural decrease, diamond = afferent. Numbers on lines represent the temporal sequence during stimulation and the thickness of lines the phasic relative
 synaptic weight of the connection as a result. The dashed line represents the hypothetical afferent pathway of the thoracic/abdominal ratio to VN. RR, respiration
 rate; I/E, inhalation/exhalation ratio; T/A, thoracic/abdominal respiration ratio; HR, heart rate; HRV, heart rate variability; INF, inﬂammation state; SNS, sympathetic
 nervous system; HPA, hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis; CAN, central autonomous network; DMN, default mode network.

in other words: these exercises lower respiration rate and VNS (rVNS). The styles of respiration providing rVNS are
ratio. However, even exercises where the breath is just an controlled breathing techniques that slow and deepen respiration
attentional focus will lead to non-volitional adjustments of and extend expiration (Garcia et al., 2013), and possibly
respiration. Practitioners just being aware of their breath enter those that put emphasis on relatively stronger diaphragmatic
slower and deeper respiration cycles. This can be caused by breathing. Note that rVNS is bilateral stimulation by nature, as
individuals’ previous experience with slow and deep breathing opposed to unilateral electrical stimulation of VNS and tVNS. In
techniques, whose respiratory patterns will be automatically Figure 2 this is represented by the nodes respiration ratio and
superimposed on current respiration. Another way is through inhalation/exhalation ratio inhibiting VN. As such, rVNS is one
the commonly slow pace of guided meditation instructions of the main mechanisms of ContAct efficacy. rVNS can have
themselves: practitioners will sync their respiration to this two routes: direct and indirect. Figure 2B represents the direct
rhythm. As focusing supposedly also leads to respiratory stimulation and Figure 2C the indirect pathway of rVNS, which
adjustments, similar to the breathing exercises, this is fit in is temporally ordered by connection numbering.
the model overview (Figure 2A) by the node ‘‘breathing focus’’
showing a dashed line towards the node ‘‘breathing regulation.’’ Direct Route
Frequently adopting these respiration patterns (slowed and with As can be seen in the dark blue path in Figure 2B, adopting
longer exhalations) can explain a significant part of the efficacy a low respiration rate and small inhalation/exhalation ratio can
found within ContAct practice. Though the ContActs are diverse, directly stimulate VN, top-down from the executive network,
they have shown a similar pattern of beneficial effects on by its own efferents (connections 2). This phasic increase in
health, mental health and cognition: mostly in stress-related vagal activity increases reactive HRV, lowers heart rate and
conditions and performance. This pattern can be explained by blood pressure (also by cardiorespiratory coupling), inhibits
these controlled breathing exercises.                 the SNS and indirectly the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal
                                                      axis, and potentially activates an anti-inflammatory pathway
Respiratory Stimulation                               (connections 3), resulting in a decrease of acute stress levels
The main mediator of controlled breathing exercises on the (connections 4). Critically, we also posit that VN activation
described health, mental health and cognitive effects is VN. statically increases cognitive control through CAN projections
We posit that specific respiration patterns serve as respiratory (connections 5).


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org 9                          October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                 Breathing in Contemplative Practice

Indirect Route                                        psychopathology, shown by the stress node inhibiting the health
Indirectly, afferent VN pathways constantly signal respiratory and negative affect nodes, but also the general cognition node.
patterns upwards, in this case characterizing a state of relaxation Furthermore, vagal dominance also leads to better immune
and low-threat. As a result, efferent VN activation further functioning and attenuation of inflammatory conditions. As
increases vagal tone and produces associated physiological can be seen in Figure 2D: VN inhibits the inflammation
consequences (e.g., lowering heart rate, blood pressure, node, which inhibits the health node. These structural and
increasing HRV); a loop of relaxation ensues. In Figure 2C tonic physiological changes in the networks are represented
this route is represented by orange diamond arrows (afferent) by bladed (activation) and elliptic arrows (inhibition) in
that signal on respiratory patterns, possibly including the Figure 2D.
ratio of thoracic and abdominal expansion (connections 1),
and the cardiac patterns influenced by the direct route Cognitive Performance
(connections 2). This relaxed body state goes up from VN rVNS increases vagal dominance in both resting state and in
to the limbic system (connections 3), that in turn re-activates active states demanding behavioral and cognitive flexibility.
VN  (connections 4), increasing its excitatory weight on The CAN (Benarroch, 1993) is a CNS network that receives
cardiac and inflammatory patterns of physiological acute stress its projections from VN and overlaps with the executive
(connections 5 and 6) and statically enhances cognitive control functioning network. The executive functioning network is not
(connections 7). The indirect route can be seen as a form only dependent on autonomic balance for proper functioning,
of biofeedback and is responsible for long-term changes in but can also be functionally and structurally changed by CAN
vagal tone. In this the respiratory patterns play a key role: activity. Enhancement of executive functions in ContAct practice
a recent study using electroneurogram to map respiratory results from rVNS of CAN, by structurally changing and
pattern signaling of the left VN, showed a near perfect overlap activating the hubs of the executive functioning network and
between this mapping and actual respiratory cycles (Sevcencu increasing their connectivity. In Figure 2D this is represented by
et al., 2018). Note that the left afferent VN is the locus of the bladed red arrow path going up from VN to the limbic system
(t)VNS.                                               to the executive network and then to the executive function node.
  Diaphragmatic breathing might provide rVNS independent Likewise, we hypothesize that default mode network (DMN,
of respiration rate and inhalation/exhalation ratio, represented Raichle et al., 2001) hubs and internal functional connectivity are
by the dashed inhibitory path of the thoracic-abdominal ratio decreased, while DMN connectivity with the executive network
to VN in Figure 2C. When oxygen demand is high during is increased. The role of the DMN can be visualized as being
exercise or stress, SNS becomes active, and thoracic respiration inhibited by vagal projections and having a two-way inhibitory
goes up, and abdominal muscles are actively inhibited (Secher pathway with the executive network, as represented in Figure 2.
and Amann, 2012). When oxygen demand is low, in times of rest These pathways are activated both phasically (Figures 2B,C) and
and digest, the vagal dominant state, the ratio shifts more towards tonically (Figure 2D).
abdominal respiration. The abdominal-thoracic respiration ratio
of the rest-and-digest mode of the PNS should thus be similar
to the ratio during ContAct practice. rVNS produces a wide Terms and Measures
range of effects in health, mental health and cognitive flexibility 1. Different forms of volitional control of respiration are defined
of the practicing individual, in the short as well as the long- as controlled breathing techniques. For this definition to be
term.                                                   valid it should be possible for humans to put respiration under
                                                        volitional control, overriding central pattern generated drive,
Long-Term Effects of Respiratory                        and this has indeed proven possible for the diaphragm (Kolár
                                                        et al., 2009).
Stimulation                                           2. Vagal tone is a construct relating to intra-individual tonal
Stress Reduction and Anti-Inﬂammation                   levels of PNS activity. Vagal tone can indirectly be indexed
Though rVNS produces a phasic change in PNS activity during using HRV, notably respiratory sinus arrhythmia.
and right after practice, in the long term it also results in 3. Vagal dominance refers to a relatively higher activity of
a tonic shift in autonomic balance, shown in Figure 2D. PNS over SNS. Vagal dominance (PNS hyperactivity and
As PNS activity goes up, SNS activity goes down. This shift SNS hypoactivity) should be observable in physiological
is known as vagal dominance. In vagal dominance chronic measures of PNS (i.e., HRV) and SNS (i.e., pre-ejection
stress and stress-related conditions are attenuated. Relaxation period, skin conductance, cortisol) activity. Vagal dominance
or rest and digest behavior increases. VN is responsible for can be increased both in acute and chronic time settings
the physiological effects of the red arrows in Figure 2D: heart (Porges, 2001, 2007). However, in this work it is defined as
rate, blood pressure and inflammatory response go down, a macro-state of autonomic balance, spanning minutes and
whereas HRV goes up, which in turn also affects (chronic) hours, not a micro-state, changing millisecond to millisecond,
stress. This works directly through tonal activity of the PNS, for example: in heart node activation.
but also indirectly through inhibition of the SNS by VN. 4. HRV is also a suitable inverse measure of acute and chronic
Specifically, reduction of the (chronic) stress response has (psychological) stress (Porges, 1992, 1995). HRV can be
positive effects on cardiovascular health and on stress-related used as an indirect indicator of intra-individual and possibly


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org 10                         October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                 Breathing in Contemplative Practice

  inter-individual differences in executive functions (Thayer that playing any piping instrument involves extreme extended
  et al., 2009).                                      exhalation.
5. As rVNS is a form of VNS, results obtained from studies using As far as we know, few studies report a decrease in HRV
  other modes of VNS should resemble those from ContAct after controlled breathing, and these are primarily found outside
  studies in similar conditions, although not necessarily with the domain of ContActs. Sasaki and Maruyama(2014) gave
  perfect overlap.                                    instructions to participants to ‘‘control breathing,’’ without
6. The stress release refers to stress responses over larger scales of emphasizing a particular style (rate or ratio), and compared that
  time; not the acute adaptive arousal employed in challenging to spontaneous breathing. This resulted in lower HRV, which
  situations, but the perseverative and chronic kind; in other may be the result of an increase in mental effort, stress, and
  words: the default stress response (Brosschot, 2017). thus SNS activity. Indeed, earlier reports also show a decrease
                                                      of HRV when breathing is only ‘‘controlled’’ (Bernardi et al.,
rVNS: Evidence and Possible Mechanisms                2000) as compared to directed in a specific direction. Note
What evidence is there for respiration as a mode of VNS? here the apparent contradiction with our own view that paying
In our model there are two ways respiration can stimulate attention to the breath would result in lower respiration rate
VN: directly and indirectly. In the direct route, slow breathing and possibly smaller inhalation/exhalation ratios: instructing to
and extended exhalation are caused by vagal activity. This ‘‘control’’ vs. ‘‘focus on’’ seems to have opposing results on
follows from the previously mentioned role of VN in respiratory autonomic balance.
affective and effective processing (slowing and exhalation). As we are reviewing breathing techniques that are practiced
Controlled breathing in this form thus uses the vagal nerve in ContActs, studies that look into autonomic functioning
as effector and increases its activity volitionally, if only through ContActs employing these kinds of techniques should
momentarily. The indirect route involves stimulation through report increased vagal tone. Indeed, HRV increases in almost
biofeedback and follows from physiological feedback theory: all forms of ContAct, consistent with the rVNS hypothesis.
by adopting physiological body patterns associated with Different forms of meditation (e.g., body scan, FA, OM acem,
relaxation and low threat situations (i.e., slow breathing) zen) and mind-body exercises such as yoga, all show increases
vagal afferents project this state to the CNS, which interprets in vagal tone HRV in healthy participants (Ditto et al., 2006;
this as a reflection of the current contextual threat level, Phongsuphap et al., 2008; Wu and Lo, 2008; Tang et al., 2009;
and proceeds by further adopting a rest-and-digest state top- Markil et al., 2012; Melville et al., 2012; Nesvold et al., 2012;
down, again through VN. The indirect route is responsible Telles et al., 2013). One exception is a study that involved
for more long-term tonic changes of vagal tone. By either the earlier mentioned ‘‘breath of fire’’ (Peng et al., 2004) that
route, breathing styles with low respiration rate and low showed a decrease in HF, LF and LF/HF ratio. This is not
inhalation/exhalation ratio should show increases in vagal surprising and consistent with our biofeedback perspective, as
tone, though in slightly different timeframes (Keyl et al., breath of fire is strictly speaking controlled hyperventilation and
2001).                                                would thus rather result in SNS activation and PNS inhibition.
                                                      Though ContActs by great majority do not employ this particular
Evidence                                              rare technique, this nonetheless stresses the importance of
Most experimental studies show higher HRV following breathing mapping actual practiced techniques in every ContAct to their
instructions, consistent with the involvement of rVNS. In outcomes. From these abundant, though correlational, findings
particular, there is ample evidence that slow and deep breathing on respiration and vagal tone we conclude that a form of
increase HRV indices of vagal tone (Hirsch and Bishop, 1981; rVNS plays a role in ContAct efficacy. However, less clear
Pal et al., 2004; Larsen et al., 2010; Lehrer and Gevirtz, 2014; is what the exact physiological mechanisms of stimulation
Critchley et al., 2015; Mortola et al., 2015; Tavares et al., might be.
2017) and lowers stress markers such as: heart rate, blood
pressure and salivary cortisol (Lee et al., 2003; Pramanik Possible Mechanisms
et al., 2009; Perciavalle et al., 2017). Van Diest et al.(2014) The first possible physiological mechanism for these respiratory
looked specifically at the effects of different inhalation/exhalation patterns to stimulate VN (as biofeedback) is by way of the
ratio at either slow or normal respiration rate on different baroreceptor reflex (Vaschillo et al., 2002; Lehrer et al., 2003).
HRV measures (peak-valley, HF): higher HRV (both measures) This reflex is responsible for regulating blood pressure and is
was reported in the slow respiration condition, but only triggered by stretch-activated mechanoreceptors (baroreceptors)
for extended exhalation, inhalation/exhalation ratio: 0.24, and in blood vessels, which leads to activation of the vagal branch of
not for extended inhalation, inhalation/exhalation ratio: 2.33. the heart node, that reduces heart rate and subsequently blood
Though normal ratios were not included, this study most clearly pressure. The threshold for triggering this reflex (cardiovagal
shows the stimulating effects of the specific respiration styles baroreflex sensitivity) can be lowered by a respiration rate
on VN. For another example of extended exhalation, albeit around 0.1 Hz or about 6 breaths per minute. Interestingly,
with a completely different aim and context: a study on native this is exactly the same respiration rate that is reported in
American flute playing showed significant increases in HRV respiration studies as having the highest increase of HRV.
during playing, contrary to what one would expect during Lowering the sensitivity results in more frequent reflexes, lower
exerting activity (Miller and Goss, 2014). It needs no mention heart rate, and increased vagal tone (Song and Lehrer, 2003;


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org 11                         October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                 Breathing in Contemplative Practice

Lin et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2010b; Lehrer and Gevirtz, goes together with PNS inactivity and vice versa. Therefore,
2014; though see Tzeng et al., 2009; for an exception). This PNS hyperactivity (as indicated by HRV) also reflects SNS
mechanism is a faster indirect route between respiration rate hypoactivity: vagal dominance. Plainly stated: relaxation means
and heart rate, as mediated by VN, than the biofeedback route absence of stress. If ContActs work through relaxation by
through VN afferent subcortical projections signaling broad respiratory stimulation of the PNS, then stress should go down.
relaxation.                                           This explains the observation that syndromes relieved after
  The second possible feedback mechanism is even more ContAct practice are often those associated with stress and SNS
direct and comes from the lungs themselves: the pulmonary dominance.
mechanoreceptors. These VN afferents directly relay tidal The role of (chronic) stressors on the development of
volume upstream and are responsible for initiating particular cardiovascular disease, through the cardiovascular response
physiological responses, notably the Hering-Breuer reflex (Obrist, 1981) of the SNS causing atherosclerosis and
(Breuer, 1868; Hering, 1868). The reflex is triggered by significant hypertension, is well documented (Allen and Patterson,
lung volume increase (e.g., during inhalation) and inhibits the 1995; Rozanski et al., 1999; Thayer et al., 2010). That stress
central inflation drive, resulting in extended exhalation and influences immune function is also well-known. Initially and
slower respiration. In this way, when a practitioner starts a acutely, stress suppresses immune function, but chronically
breathing exercise with a deep breath (a long inhalation), this it exacerbates immune response (Sapolsky et al., 2000;
immediately triggers the reflex, resulting both in activation of Haroon et al., 2011; Ménard et al., 2017). Additionally,
VN as well as the initiation of respiration styles that further stress seems to worsen auto-immune disease (Elenkov and
relay relaxation. Furthermore, the dominant and supported view Chrousos, 2002). Furthermore, there are indications that
is that the mechanoreceptors, together with central pattern the two systems are related in their morbidity by SNS-PNS
generated drive, are also responsible for respiratory sinus imbalance: recovery of both cardiovascular and immunological
arrhythmia (Taha et al., 1995; Eckberg, 2003; Mortola et al., markers is impaired after stressors, when baseline vagal
2015).                                                tone is low (Weber et al., 2010). Also noteworthy is the
  The slowest of the indirect routes: biofeedback, where low existence of an inverse relationship between HRV and both
respiration rate and small inhalation/exhalation ratio signal inflammation and the risk of cardiovascular disease (Haensel
a resting state to the CNS is consistent with the James- et al., 2008). Bringing these findings together, HRV seems
Lange physiological feedback hypothesis of emotion and similar suitable as a multi-index of health: of physiological stress
accounts (Levenson, 1994; Critchley and Garfinkel, 2015). The (Porges, 1995), as a measure of cardiovascular risk (Thayer
theory, independently proposed by William James and Carl et al., 2010) and of immunomodulation (Thayer and Sternberg,
Lange, maintains that the identification and experience of 2010).
an emotion follows from peripheral physiological responses In the mental health domain, mood disorders such as
(e.g., arousal), instead of the other way around. The kind depression are widely recognized as being stress-related. They
of emotion experienced depends on the interpretation of the are often accompanied or triggered by acute or chronic life event
physiological state and the appraisal of the context in which it stressors in the prodromal phase (Gold and Chrousos, 2002;
is triggered. So, the physiological stress response precedes the Duman and Monteggia, 2006; Orosz et al., 2017). Depression
subjective emotional experience of fear or sadness. Following has also shown a relation with the other stress-related diseases:
this argument, bottom-up changes to dysfunctional emotional there is a link of depression with occurrence of cardiovascular
states can be produced by changing the physiological state disease (Hare et al., 2014) and with the likelihood of having an
of the body; in other words: relaxing the body relaxes the overreacting immune system (Dantzer et al., 2008; Miller et al.,
mind.                                                 2009; Felger and Lotrich, 2013). All in all, these systems and
  In sum, there is evidence that particular breathing exercises their pathologies seem to be interrelated, wherein the common
(with low respiration rate, small inhalation/exhalation ratio) denominator is autonomic balance.
are capable of stimulating the vagal nerve (rVNS), though the A healthy autonomic balance is vagally dominated and
exact mechanisms of stimulation are proposed, not proven comes about by stress relief produced by PNS activation
(i.e., baroreflex). The next question is how prolonged increase and SNS deactivation. If this is the way the aforementioned
in vagal tone results in the beneficial effects found on health pathologies are positively affected, then there should be a
and mental health. Vagal dominance is contingent on consistent clear negative relationship between vagal tone and the risk
physiological relaxation. It therefore produces (chronic) stress factors and symptoms of these conditions. Indeed, HRV shows
release, and thereby prevents or ameliorates stress-related a negative correlation with cardiovascular disease in children
pathology and etiology.                               and adults (Tully et al., 2013; Oliveira et al., 2017) and even
                                                      directly predicts hypertension (Schroeder et al., 2003). It has
                                                      an inverse relationship with inflammation (Lampert et al.,
Relaxation vs. Stress: Health and Mental              2008; Kemp and Quintana, 2013), inflammation in depression
Health Outcomes                                       (Carney et al., 2007), depressive symptoms in children and
Although SNS and PNS can be simultaneously active in a adults (Sgoifo et al., 2015; Koenig et al., 2016), perseverative
particular domain, they mostly operate as opposing forces cognition (Ottaviani et al., 2016), bipolar disorder symptomology
(Berntson and Cacioppo, 1999; Freeman, 2006). SNS activity (Faurholt-Jepsen et al., 2017), general anxiety and disorders


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org 12                         October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                 Breathing in Contemplative Practice

(Cohen and Benjamin, 2006; Tully et al., 2013; Chalmers et al., attentional lapses (Williams et al., 2016), and it is involved
2014) and has recently even shown a negative correlation in cognitive inhibition, proactive cognitive control (Capuana
with schizophrenia (Clamor et al., 2016). Though schizophrenia et al., 2012, 2014) and emotional inhibition of conditioned
is not considered a stress-related disorder, the role of HRV fear (Wendt et al., 2015). A recent meta-analysis also supports
in schizophrenia is intriguing considering the interplay of a relationship between HRV and cognitive control: executive
dysfunctional emotional regulation and executive functions in its functioning, pooled across the subdivisions of Miyake et al.
symptomology.                                         (2000), showed a positive average association with HRV level,
  Stress has a negative association with executive or PFC though the authors note a strong publication bias (Zahn et al.,
function. Chronic stress has a degenerative effect on PFC 2016). The effects can especially be observed in cognitively
structure and functioning (Arnsten, 2009, 2015; McEwen and demanding settings. A brain imaging study shows that functional
Morrison, 2013) and seems to adversely affect its plasticity connectivity of the amygdala and medial PFC are associated with
(McEwen et al., 2012). A study by Zhang et al.(2014), that higher HRV in both younger and older people (Sakaki et al.,
builds on the correlational work of Nagai and others (Nagai 2016).
et al., 2004, see Critchley and Garfinkel, 2015, for a review) The link between HRV and the PFC seems to be very direct:
shows a causal involvement of ventromedial PFC in physiological they share a common genetic background (Thayer et al., 2009)
arousal: when ventromedial PFC activity goes up, electrodermal and HRV and executive functions show a similar ontogenetic
activity (skin conductance level) goes down. In other words: developmental trajectory; going up until early adulthood and
prefrontal structures suppress stress. A conclusive review by going down again with advancing age (Umetani et al., 1998;
the international behavioral neuroscience meeting (Radley et al., Zelazo et al., 2004). This is expected if VN and PFC form
2015) stated the negative effects of stress on the plasticity of a single system: CAN. Another clue to the involvement of
the limbic network (amygdala, hippocampus and PFC) and its VN in executive functions comes from the work of van der
pivotal role in the etiology of aforementioned (mental) health Molen(2000) into the development of inhibitory control. During
conditions.                                           successful cognitive inhibition of action representations, heart
  In sum, (chronic) stress is a significant negative mediator in rate deceleration can be observed, after which heart rate goes up
all of the domains that benefit from ContAct. It is here proposed again (Schel et al., 2013). As we have seen, heart rate slowing is
that these beneficial effects occur by (chronic) stress relief as a under direct control of VN, indicating vagal dominance during
result of vagal dominance by rVNS. In other words: breathing employment of cognitive control.
exercises produce stress relief (Lee et al., 2003; Pramanik et al.,
2009; Perciavalle et al., 2017). We have also already indicated Changes in CAN Regions Through ContAct
that chronic and high levels of stress are negatively related to As we hypothesize that in ContAct rVNS is responsible
executive functions and PFC functioning. Next, we will show for the emotional and cognitive enhancement by changes in
that there is also a positive relation between vagal tone, CAN CAN, studies looking at functional and structural changes
areas and the executive functioning network, as predicted by in the brain in practitioners should show these changes
the neurovisceral integration model, and between changes in along this whole network—in the limbic system and executive
CAN and ContAct practice as predicted by the rVNS model of functioning network; in the levels of the updated neurovisceral
ContAct.                                              integration model (see Smith et al., 2017). Studies on ContAct
                                                      practice have shown this for the limbic part of CAN. For
CAN: Regulated Emotion and Enhanced                   example, a decrease in volume and activity has been observed
Cognition                                             in the amygdala (Hölzel et al., 2010; Tang et al., 2015)
The link from VN to PFC (Ter Horst and Postema, 1997; Wager and in the hippocampus (Luders et al., 2009, 2012c) in
et al., 2009a,b) is a critical element of the CAN in mediating practitioners of different styles of meditation (both FA and
rVNS effects of ContAct onto executive functions. Likewise, OM). Insular cortex and posterior cingulate also increase in
projections into limbic parts of the CAN allow ContAct to activity and volume in the same populations (Lazar et al.,
enhance positive affect via rVNS. If these projections are actually 2005; Hölzel et al., 2011a,b; Kirk et al., 2011; Luders et al.,
used, vagal tone should have a positive correlation: (i) with 2012b; Tang et al., 2015). The practice of yoga shows the
executive functions or PFC activation and (ii) with emotional same pattern (Froeliger et al., 2012; Desai et al., 2015),
control or medial PFC activation. See Thayer and Lane(2000) while a TCC study shows the most significant morphological
for the CAN network as adapted in the original neurovisceral changes in the insula and dorsolateral PFC (Wei et al.,
integration model.                                    2013).
                                                        The ACC is a limbic structure, but is also part of executive
HRV, Cognitive Control and PFC                        functioning network and active in cognitive control, and is
There indeed is an association between HRV and executive central in CAN. Notably its dorsal part has been implicated
functions, as first shown by Thayer and Fischer(2009), especially in autonomic control, as it modulates cardiovascular stress
in emotional control: HRV predicts inhibition of attention responses (Critchley et al., 2003). Following the previous
to emotional stimuli (Park et al., 2012, 2013), it shows a argument, ACC should also be implicated in imaging studies
positive relation to attentional control and negative relation of ContAct efficacy, and indeed, functional and structural
to risk aversion in anxiety (Ramírez et al., 2015), predicts enhancement in ACC has been reported in meditation styles


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org 13                         October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                 Breathing in Contemplative Practice

and in mind-body exercises (Cahn and Polich, 2006; Tang hub (posterior cingulate) and in the limbic system (insula),
et al., 2009, 2010, 2015; Hölzel et al., 2011b; Xue et al., concurrently increasing activity in dorsolateral PFC of the
2011; Wei et al., 2013). The frontal end stations of CAN also executive network (Kosel et al., 2011). Another imaging study
show predicted structural changes: PFC gray matter density is (on epilepsy), reports a decrease in regional cerebral blood
increased by diverse meditation styles and mind-body exercises flow in the DMN hub parahippocampus, as well as in the
(Lazar et al., 2005; Luders et al., 2009, 2012a; Lutz et al., hippocampus and the thalamus by chronic VNS (Van Laere et al.,
2015; Hölzel et al., 2011a; Froeliger et al., 2012; Tang et al., 2002).
2015; Wei et al., 2013; Yin et al., 2014; Desai et al., 2015). The few tVNS studies so far show a similar pattern as those
In sum, there is a large overlap between the brain regions obtained with VNS. One study of major depression reports
changed by ContAct—amygdala, hippocampus, insula, ACC and that tVNS decreases the resting-state functional connectivity
multiple areas of the PFC—and those identified in CAN. Note, between main DMN hubs and parahippocampus—the DMN
however, that these areas have been implicated in behavioral hub that connects to the limbic system—and anterior insula
studies with very diverse tasks and contexts—not only in (Fang et al., 2016). Contrarily, it increases the resting-
ContAct.                                              state functional connectivity of DMN with the precuneus
                                                      and orbitofrontal cortex (executive network). In addition, all
Default Mode and Executive Network Plasticity by      these connectomic changes were associated with reductions
VNS                                                   in depression severity. A fMRI study in a normal population
In general, brain connectivity seems to increase by ContAct shows that tVNS can acutely reduce activity in DMN hubs:
practice across multiple projections, commissures and parahippocampal and posterior cingulate (Kraus et al., 2013).
associatedsociative networks, as shown by several diffusion There are also indications that tVNS produces changes in
tensor imaging studies (Luders et al., 2011, 2012b). Meditation the executive network itself. Badran et al.(2018) are the
practice (and trait mindfulness) is associated with greater first to show increases in metabolic activity between the
connectivity between the executive, DMN and salience networks main hub axis of dorsolateral PFC and ACC by tVNS.
specifically (Brewer et al., 2011; Hasenkamp and Barsalou, Another tVNS study produces changes between the executive
2012; Doll et al., 2015). Notably the DMN is implicated in network and limbic system, by decreasing functional connectivity
neuroimaging studies among ContAct practitioners. DMN is between rostral ACC and medial hypothalamus in depression,
active when external stimulation and work demand is low. all associated with clinical improvement (Tu et al., 2018).
Its main hubs are medial PFC, posterior cingulate cortex Somewhat paradoxically, a study on patients diagnosed with
and parahippocampal region (Raichle et al., 2001); the last major depressive disorder showed a decrease in symptoms
of which is believed to operate as the hub between DMN due to tVNS, but combined with an increase in resting-state
and limbic areas (Ward et al., 2014). The role of DMN functional connectivity between the amygdala and dorsolateral
in cognitive control can be seen as opposing that of the PFC, so between the limbic and executive systems (Liu et al.,
executive network; lapses of attentional control (i.e., mind 2016).
wandering) are contingent on DMN activity over executive Concluding: it has clearly been shown that activity in
network activity (Gratton et al., 2018), in this way DMN can afferent branches of VN can affect areas and networks in
be viewed as a ‘‘task-negative’’ network (Fox et al., 2005). the CNS, both acutely (e.g., by tVNS) and chronically (e.g.,
Studies on changes in connectivity by ContAct experience by chronic VNS). This notably affects the DMN, which is a
show deactivation of DMN hubs (i.e., posterior cingulate critical CAN level in the latest version of the neurovisceral
and  medial PFC) and  decreased functional connectivity integration model (see Smith et al., 2017 for details). Central
between these hubs. At the  same time  the functional changes as a result of ContAct practice within DMN and
connectivity between the DMN  and  executive networks between DMN and executive network are practically identical
goes up (Brewer et al., 2011; Hasenkamp and Barsalou, 2012). to those observed by (t)VNS studies. This makes vagal
This mirrors what is consistently found in imaging studies involvement and thus the mechanism of rVNS highly likely
that apply VNS  to individuals with (treatment-resistant) in producing these neurobiological effects and the concomitant
depression.                                           improvements in cognition and affect. Concretely stated:
  Depression is associated with a disrupted DMN, particularly: DMN deactivation and increased DMN-executive network
hyperactivity and hyper-connectivity among DMN hubs, as connectivity is caused by rVNS and will lead to improvements
well as hyper-connectivity between DMN and limbic system, in cognitive control (e.g., cognitive inhibition) and performance
and hypo-connectivity between DMN and executive network monitoring.
(Drevets et al., 2008; Gong and He, 2015; Kaiser et al.,
2015). Clinical trials employing chronic VNS in patients with DISCUSSION
depression show a normalization of this etiology, obtaining
results very similar to ContAct practice. One study on patients We have shown that ContAct practices, though diverse, have
with depression not responding to regular treatment showed a number of components in common that can explain their
increased metabolism in the DMN hub ventromedial PFC  efficacy in individual physical health, mental health and
(Pardo et al., 2008). While a similar study reported decreased cognition. Furthermore, one of these components: breathing
activity (regional cerebral blood flow) in another DMN techniques, is a prime candidate to explain the complete


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org 14                         October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                 Breathing in Contemplative Practice

pattern of results, notably in the stress-related domain. We controlled), than in ContActs that do not emphasize this
have further provided a neurophysiological model in which distinction.
slow respiration and extended exhalation stimulate VN via Some ContAct practitioners might proclaim that their
two possible routes: rVNS. This results in PNS over SNS particular tradition (notably FA) does not involve any breathing
dominance, structural and functional changes in higher cortical exercises. That the exercises only instruct to pay attention to
areas through autonomic projections, and is thus responsible for the breath, and not to modulate respiration in any way; that
aforementioned effects.                               instructions to change anything in breathing patterns are absent.
  In these claims, one of the main arguments for the rVNS They might also state that the breath is only one of many foci.
model of ContAct concerns the dovetailing between specific For example: it could be a visual focus, such as a flickering
functions of VN with the pattern of effectivity shown by diverse candle flame or verbal, as in a mantra. But the fact is, that
ContActs; providing beneficial effects on cardiopulmonary across these diverse FA traditions it usually is not another kind
fitness, immune function, psychological health, stress, anxiety of focus, it usually is the breath, and we maintain that this
and executive functions. The neurophysiological link between is not arbitrary. As previously stated, we maintain that it is
the two can be found in vagal tone: the existent relationship unlikely that focusing on the breath does not affect respiratory
between the aforementioned functions and conditions with HRV patterns. In our view, directed conscious awareness to breathing
and that of HRV with the VN. Evidently HRV is then an index of will slow respiration in expert and layman alike, through direct
adaptability in a broad sense.                        and indirect experience with different breathing exercises and the
  We realize that there might be more common factors  implicit or explicit idea, an ideomotor representation if you will,
involved in ContAct interventions than we have covered and what it should be like to meditate: meditating involves relaxed
categorized here. There also might be unique components to breathing. Furthermore, the rhythm of auditory instructions is in
particular traditions, as well as emergent properties of specific a slower pace than normal breathing, thereby slowing respiration
combinations of components; almost all ContAct interventions as well. Of course, these are assumptions that should be tested in
are multi-modal. For example, many of the covered traditions further experiments. But, if attention does slow respiration, this
are not practiced in isolation, but in group sessions. Social, makes all these traditions fall under the explanatory umbrella of
and even physical, contact could be a factor in relieving stress the rVNS model of ContAct.
and in alleviating depression. Though we do not discount the So far, the picture painted from rVNS has been optimistic.
other factors covered and those possibly left out, we believe However, there might be circumstances and doses where no
that respiration style and vagal functioning fit the evidence beneficial effects can be expected. For example: in chronically
best, and following Occam’s razor, it stands out as the most stressed individuals vagal activation might have such a high
parsimonious of explanations. However, also rVNS might benefit threshold that rVNS will have no noticeable effect; they might
from a specific combination. For instance, combining rVNS prove resistant to the intervention. rVNS might even have
with affect training: exposure and reappraisal procedures could adverse effects, such as overstimulation. In a condition known
be strengthened by the concurrent body relaxation brought on as vasovagal syncope, vagal efferents reduce heart rate to such a
by rVNS, the biofeedback would weaken the stress response degree that blood pressure drops to dangerous levels, resulting
and negative emotion brought up by an aversive or traumatic in fainting and symptoms of chronic fatigue. As indicated by
memory.                                               VNS studies showing bronchoconstriction, stimulation might
  Following the observation on the multi-modality of ContAct, be dangerous for pulmonary pathology, such as chronic
we maintain that many null-findings and conflicting results asthma (Hajnšek et al., 2010). However, studies varying VNS
in the literature could be ascribed to the presence or absence voltage suggest that strength of stimulation could make the
of particular effective components. For example, a yoga class difference between beneficial or detrimental (Hoffmann et al.,
only focusing on stretching and shifting positions might 2012). Respiratory VNS might be as beneficial and healthy
not have any executive functions benefits other than those as the individual baselines (e.g., autonomic balance) allow.
stemming from some form  of relaxation, but does show By extension, these dangers could be present for ContAct
changes associated with mild exercise. Studies performing practices as well. But as far as we know, there are no studies
systematic analyses that compare functional ContAct elements, on adverse effects produced by ContActs. This does not deny
based on concrete predictions, are therefore sorely needed. their existence as the absence could be a result of publication
Reported findings that show controlled breathing increasing bias.
SNS activity further underline the importance of making On a similar note: higher vagal tone HRV is not always better.
clear what kind of techniques are employed. This includes Much like arousal levels optimal levels of HRV for physical
reporting on the exact instructions given and controlling for and mental functioning might follow an inverted U-shape, as in
compliance to these instructions. Our predictions are only valid the Yerkes-Dodson law (Yerkes and Dodson, 1908). Individuals
as far as interventions result in slow, deep (diaphragmatic) with a resting HRV at the right side of their personal curve
breathing—not in other breathing styles, such as fast and might actually present adverse effects if HRV levels are further
deep breathing during physical exercise. Thus, the described increased, autonomic balance shifting too far away from the
beneficial effects on health and cognition are predicted to sympathetic. In contrast, individuals with HRV levels falling at
occur more in ContActs with breathing exercises stressing the left end of that curve might benefit the most from increasing
relatively short inhale (SNS controlled) and long exhale (PNS HRV (by rVNS), being ‘‘parasympathetically compromised.’’


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org 15                         October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                 Breathing in Contemplative Practice

Also, there might be differences between populations in the activity and balance should be developed. In any case, the
shape of this curve and there might be different curves for rVNS model of ContAct still provides testable and falsifiable
different VN functions. For example, as first reported by Wang predictions.
et al.(2005), but see Hill et al.(2015) for a review, African Though we are not able to definitively prove a causal
Americans’ resting HRV is on average higher than that of link between breathing, VNS and improvements in body and
Caucasian Americans, while the prevalence of cardiovascular mind, we believe we have provided ample evidence suggesting
disease is higher in African than in Caucasian Americans. the existence of this link, largely by providing overlapping
This is counterintuitive if HRV is seen as a pure measure of patterns of specific phenomena. Empirical studies need to
vagal tone. At the same time, the relationship with anxiety put our hypotheses to the test. Furthermore, other concrete
and depression does follow the predicted direction: African neurobiological mechanisms for the systems described in this
Americans suffer less from these conditions than Caucasian work need to be proposed and charted by experimental studies,
Americans (Breslau et al., 2006). Further research has to address as prescribed for the field by Thayer et al.(2011). Studies on
the question whether there is an inverse relationship between different respiration styles, using psychophysiological measures
HRV and cardiovascular disease in this population, whether for PNS and SNS activity and tasks assessing executive functions
relatively higher HRV for this population is not optimal HRV acutely and longitudinally could provide concrete tests of our
regarding cardiopulmonary function, giving room for further hypotheses. Imaging studies mapping structural and functional
enhancement, or perhaps whether this is a HRV methodological changes in the CAN following rVNS are critical for our
artifact.                                             hypotheses on cognitive functioning, especially: changes in DMN
  In light of the necessity to report the specific instructions and executive network mirroring VNS results are expected.
and exercises in every intervention study, mention has to Other indirect tests include experiments comparing ContAct
be made of mindfulness meditation. When we and many   interventions with (t)VNS manipulations. As an established
other authors report on mindfulness meditation, this usually phenomenon, studies of rVNS dose-response relationships, with
refers to two clinical programs: mindfulness-based stress personal baseline levels, could follow. What is the ‘‘vagus code’’
reduction and mindfulness-based cognitive therapy. Both of of rVNS (Kwan et al., 2016)? What are observed differences
these are multi-modal interventions, in which not only caused by specific modes of stimulation? For instance, electrical
mindfulness meditation and other meditation techniques play VNS and behavioral rVNS differ also in laterality: unilateral vs.
a role, but also physical exercises (some form of yoga), bilateral stimulation, which might produce different effects (and
mental strategies, and in mindfulness-based cognitive therapy: strength of stimulation).
cognitive-behavioral therapy. Most studies that report on the Lastly, as for the reasons why breathing techniques have gone
effects of mindfulness or mindfulness meditation, that use these pretty much unnoticed as a mechanism of ContAct efficacy,
programs as interventions, should therefore strictly speaking while being so prevalent and well-known, we propose that it
not be taken as ‘‘pure’’ mindfulness meditation; subsequently, perhaps has to do with this prevalence: it is such an unremarkable
caution is advised in interpreting result.            fact, so plainly observable and a starting point of practice. This
  We want to note that HRV (respiratory sinus arrhythmia) could be coupled with a tendency to focus on ‘‘higher’’ levels of
as a valid measure of vagal tone, also maintained by Thayer consciousness among practitioners, and on higher level processes
and colleagues, is not without its critics (Grossman and Taylor, and structures in cognitive neuroscientific research. Relaxation
2007). Grossman and colleagues have shown in their experiments might also be assumed and uninteresting, breathing exercises
that under different respiration conditions, respiratory sinus are automatically factored in, something for novices, hardly
arrhythmia does not reflect changes in vagal tone accurately remembered by the expert. We hope that through this work
(Kollai and Mizsei, 1990; Grossman and Kollai, 1993; Taylor future research on ContActs will recognize and study breathing
et al., 2001). They maintain that HRV measures should always techniques as an effective component, and that neuroscience will
be controlled for by respiration. Since these studies, there has focus on rVNS respiratory patterns as potential cognitive and
been limited follow-up of these criticisms, as can be seen in a (mental) health enhancers.
recent review of HRV methods (Laborde et al., 2017). We believe
this issue should be addressed resolutely. More neuroscientific
experiments directly assessing the relation between the different AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
HRV  measures and vagal tone are needed. As far as the
                                                      RG  conceived the presented idea, developed the model,
implications for the rVNS model of ContAct: it includes
                                                      posited possible mechanisms and wrote the main drafts. GB
assumptions made by the polyvagal and the neurovisceral
                                                      supervised the project, and edited and rewrote manuscript
integration accounts; and it loads evidence for the existence of
                                                      drafts. All authors contributed to the final version of the
rVNS on those assumptions. However, we maintain that HRV
                                                      manuscript.
does not need to be a ‘‘pure’’ measure of vagal tone for it
to be useful as a measurement—a relational representation is
enough. But even if respiration confounds on vagal tone are ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
insurmountable, making HRV unusable as its measure, this
will not affect the core assumptions of our model and the We want to thank Marieke van Vugt and Henk van Steenbergen
predictions it makes. In the future, other measures of SNS/PNS for commenting on an earlier version of this work.


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org 16                         October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                                            Breathing in Contemplative Practice


REFERENCES                                                              Borovikova, L. V., Ivanova, S., Zhang, M., Yang, H., Botchkina, G. I.,
                                                                           Watkins, L. R., et al. (2000). Vagus nerve stimulation attenuates the
Agostoni, E., Chinnock, J. E., De Daly, M. B., and Murray, J. G. (1957).   systemic inflammatory response to endotoxin. Nature 405, 458–462.
   Functional and histological studies of the vagus nerve and its branches to doi: 10.1038/35013070
   the heart, lungs and abdominal viscera in the cat. J. Physiol. 135, 182–205. Bower, J. E., and Irwin, M. R. (2016). Mind-body therapies and control of
   doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1957.sp005703                                     inflammatory biology: a descriptive review. Brain Behav. Immun. 51, 1–11.
Allen, M., and Patterson, S. (1995). Hemoconcentration and stress: a review of doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2015.06.012
   physiological mechanisms and relevance for cardiovascular disease risk. Biol. Bratton, B. O., Martelli, D., McKinley, M. J., Trevaks, D., Anderson, C. R.,
   Psychol. 41, 1–27. doi: 10.1016/0301-0511(95)05123-r                    and McAllen, R. M. (2012). Neural regulation of inflammation: No neural
Andreu, C. I., Moënne-Loccoz, C., López, V., Slagter, H. A., Franken, I. H. A., and connection from the vagus to splenic sympathetic neurons. Exp. Physiol. 97,
   Cosmelli, D. (2017). Behavioral and electrophysiological evidence of enhanced 1180–1185. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.2011.061531
   monitoring in meditators. Mindfulness 8, 1603–1614. doi: 10.1007/s12671-017- Breslau, J., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Kendler, K. S., Su, M., Williams, D., and
   0732-z                                                                  Kessler, R. C. (2006). Specifying race-ethnic differences in risk for
Andrews, P. L. R., and Lawes, I. N. C. (1992). ‘‘A protective role for vagal psychiatric disorder in a USA national sample. Psychol. Med. 36, 57–68.
   afferents: an hypothesis,’’ in Neuroanatomy and Physiology of Abdominal Vagal doi: 10.1017/s0033291705006161
   Afferents, eds S. Ritter, R. C. Ritter, and C. D. Barnes (Boca Raton: CRC Press), Breuer, J. (1868). Die Selbststeuerung der Athmung durch den Nervus vagus.
   280–303.                                                                Sitzungsber. Kaiserlichen Akad. Wiss. 58, 909–937.
Araujo, H. F., Kaplan, J., and Damasio, A. (2013). Cortical midline structures Brewer, J. A., Worhunsky, P. D., Gray, J. R., Tang, Y.-Y., Weber, J., and
   and autobiographical-self processes: an activation-likelihood estimation meta- Kober, H. (2011). Meditation experience is associated with differences in
   analysis. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7:548. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00548    default mode network activity and connectivity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A
Arnold, R. W. (1999). The human heart rate response profiles to five vagal 108, 20254–20259. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1112029108
   maneuvers. Yale J. Biol. Med. 72, 237–244.                           Brosschot, J. F. (2017). Ever at the ready for events that never happen. Eur.
Arnsten, A. F. T. (2009). Stress signaling pathways that impair prefrontal J. Psychotraumatol. 8:1309934. doi: 10.1080/20008198.2017.1309934
   cortex structure and function. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 410–422. doi: 10.1038/ Brown, R. P., and Gerbarg, P. L. (2005). Sudarshan kriya yogic breathing in the
   nrn2648                                                                 treatment of stress, anxiety and depression: part I-neurophysiologic model.
Arnsten, A. F. T. (2015). Stress weakens prefrontal networks: molecular insults to J. Altern. Complement. Med. 11, 189–201. doi: 10.1089/acm.2005.11.189
   higher cognition. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 1376–1385. doi: 10.1038/nn.4087 Brown, R. P., and Gerbarg, P. L. (2009). Yoga breathing, meditation and longevity.
Badran, B. W., Dowdle, L. T., Mithoefer, O. J., LaBate, N. T., Coatsworth, J., Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 1172, 54–62. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04394.x
   Brown, J. C., et al. (2018). Neurophysiologic effects of transcutaneous auricular Browning, K. N., Verheijden, S., and Boeckxstaens, G. E. (2017). The vagus nerve
   vagus nerve stimulation (taVNS) via electrical stimulation of the tragus: in appetite regulation, mood and intestinal inflammation. Gastroenterology
   a concurrent taVNS/fMRI study and review. Brain Stimul. 11, 492–500.    152, 730–744. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2016.10.046
   doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2017.12.009                                       Büssing, A., Michalsen, A., Khalsa, S. B. S., Telles, S., and Sherman, K. J. (2012).
Balasubramaniam, M., Telles, S., and Doraiswamy, P. M. (2013). Yoga on our Effects of yoga on mental and physical health: a short summary of reviews. Evid.
   minds: a systematic review of yoga for neuropsychiatric disorders. Front. Based Complement. Alternat. Med. 2012:165410. doi: 10.1155/2012/165410
   Psychiatry 3:117. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2012.00117                      Cahn, B. R., and Polich, J. (2006). Meditation states and traits: EEG, ERP and
Benarroch, E. E. (1993). The    central autonomic network: functional      neuroimaging studies. Psychol. Bull. 132, 180–211. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.132.
   organization, dysfunction and perspective. Mayo Clin Proc. 68, 988–1001. 2.180
   doi: 10.1016/s0025-6196(12)62272-1                                   Cakmak, Y. O., Ekinci, G., Afsar, N., and Cavdar, S. (2011). Structural cortical
Benarroch, E. E. (1997). ‘‘The central autonomic network,’’ in Clinical Autonomic plasticity induced by the mindfullness meditation of the Sufi Whirling
   Disorders, ed. P. A. Low (Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven), 17–23.       Derwishes. Neurosci. Res. 71:e96. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2011.07.412
Bernardi, L., Passino, C., Wilmerding, V., Dallam, G. M., Parker, D. L., Cakmak, Y. O., Ekinci, G., Heinecke, A., and Çavdar, S. (2017). A possible role of
   Robergs, R. A., et al. (2001). Breathing patterns and cardiovascular autonomic prolonged whirling episodes on structural plasticity of the cortical networks
   modulation during hypoxia induced by simulated altitude. J. Hypertens. 19, and altered vertigo perception: the cortex of sufi whirling dervishes. Front.
   947–958. doi: 10.1097/00004872-200105000-00016                          Hum. Neurosci. 11:3. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2017.00003
Bernardi, L., Wdowczyk-Szulc, J., Valenti, C., Castoldi, S., Passino, C., Canning, B. J. (2006). Reflex regulation of airway smooth muscle tone. J. Appl.
   Spadacini, G., et al. (2000). Effects of controlled breathing, mental activity and Physiol. 101, 971–985. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00313.2006
   mental stress with or without verbalization on heart rate variability. J. Am. Coll. Capuana, L. J., Dywan, J., Tays, W. J., Elmers, J. L., Witherspoon, R., and
   Cardiol. 35, 1462–1469. doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(00)00595-7              Segalowitz, S. J. (2014). Factors influencing the role of cardiac autonomic
Bernstein, A., Hadash, Y., Lichtash, Y., Tanay, G., Shepherd, K., and      regulation in the service of cognitive control. Biol. Psychol. 102, 88–97.
   Fresco, D. M. (2015). Decentering and related constructs: a critical review doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2014.07.015
   and meta-cognitive processes model. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 10, 599–617. Capuana, L. J., Dywan, J., Tays, W. J., and Segalowitz, S. J. (2012). Cardiac
   doi: 10.1177/1745691615594577                                           workload and inhibitory control in younger and older adults. Biol. Psychol. 90,
Berntson, G. G., and Cacioppo, J. T. (1999). Heart rate variability: a neuroscientific 60–70. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2012.02.018
   perspective for further studies. Card. Electrophysiol. Rev. 3, 279–282. Carney, R. M., Freedland, K. E., Stein, P. K., Miller, G. E., Steinmeyer, B.,
   doi: 10.1023/A:1009920002142                                            Rich, M. W., et al. (2007). Heart rate  variability and markers of
Berryman, N., Bherer, L., Nadeau, S., Lauzière, S., Lehr, L., Bobeuf, F., et al. (2014). inflammation and coagulation in depressed patients with coronary heart
   Multiple roads lead to Rome: combined high-intensity aerobic and strength disease. J. Psychosom. Res. 62, 463–467. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2006.12.004
   training vs. gross motor activities leads to equivalent improvement in executive Chalmers, J., Quintana, D., Abbott, M., and Kemp, A. (2014). Anxiety disorders are
   functions in a cohort of healthy older adults. Age 36:9710. doi: 10.1007/s11357- associated with reduced heart rate variability: a meta-analysis. Front. Psychiatry
   014-9710-8                                                              5:80. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2014.00080
Berthoud, H. R., and Neuhuber, W. L. (2000). Functional and chemical anatomy Chang, Y., Nien, Y., Tsai, C., and Etnier, J. L. (2010). Physical activity and cognition
   of the afferent vagal system. Auton. Neurosci. 85, 1–17. doi: 10.1016/S1566- in older adults: the potential of Tai Chi Chuan. J. Aging Phys. Act. 18, 451–472.
   0702(00)00215-0                                                         doi: 10.1123/japa.18.4.451
Black, D. S., Cole, S. W., Irwin, M. R., Breen, E., St. Cyr, N. M., Nazarian, N., Chang, R. B., Strochlic, D. E., Umans, B. D., Liberles, S. D., and Williams, E. K.
   et al. (2013). Yogic meditation reverses NF-kB and IRF-related transcriptome (2015). Vagal sensory neuron subtypes that differentially control breathing. Cell
   dynamics in leukocytes of family dementia caregivers in a randomized    161, 622–633. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.03.022
   controlled trial. Psychoneuroendocrinology 38, 348–355. doi: 10.1016/j. Chi, I., Jordan-Marsh, M., Guo, M., Xie, B., and Bai, Z. (2013). Tai chi
   psyneuen.2012.06.011                                                    and reduction of depressive symptoms for older adults: a meta-analysis of


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org                 17                                    October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                                            Breathing in Contemplative Practice


   randomized trials. Geriatr. Gerontol. Int. 13, 3–12. doi: 10.1111/j.1447-0594. Das, U. N. (2011). Vagal nerve stimulation in prevention and management of
   2012.00882.x                                                            coronary heart disease. World J. Cardiol. 3, 105–110. doi: 10.4330/wjc.v3.i4.105
Chiesa, A., and Serretti, A. (2010). A systematic review of neurobiological and Desai, R., Tailor, A., and Bhatt, T. (2015). Effects of yoga on brain waves and
   clinical features of mindfulness meditations. Psychol. Med. 40, 1239–1252. structural activation: a review. Complement. Ther. Clin. Pract. 21, 112–118.
   doi: 10.1017/S0033291709991747                                          doi: 10.1016/j.ctcp.2015.02.002
Chiesa, A., and Serretti, A. (2011). Mindfulness based cognitive therapy for Dietrich, S., Smith, J., Scherzinger, C., Hofmann-Preiß, K., Freitag, T.,
   psychiatric disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychiatry Res. Eisenkolb, A., et al. (2008). A novel transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation
   187, 441–453. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2010.08.011                       leads to brainstem and cerebral activations measured by functional MRI.
Clamor, A., Lincoln, T. M., Thayer, J. F., and Koenig, J. (2016). Resting vagal Biomed. Tech. 53, 104–111. doi: 10.1515/bmt.2008.022
   activity in schizophrenia: meta-Analysis of heart rate variability as a potential Di Francescomarino, S. D., Sciartilli, A., Valerio, V. D., Baldassarre, A. D., and
   endophenotype. Br. J. Psychiatry 208, 9–16. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.114.160762 Gallina, S. (2009). The effect of physical exercise on endothelial function. Sports
Clancy, J., Mary, D., and Witte, K. (2014). Non-invasive vagus nerve stimulation in Med. 39, 797–812. doi: 10.2165/11317750-000000000-00000
   healthy humans reduces sympathetic nerve activity. Brain Stimul. 7, 871–877. Ditto, B., Eclache, M., and Goldman, N. (2006). Short-term autonomic and
   doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2014.07.031                                          cardiovascular effects of mindfulness body scan meditation. Ann. Behav. Med.
Clark, D., Schumann, F., and Mostofsky, S. H. (2015). Mindful movement and 32, 227–234. doi: 10.1207/s15324796abm3203_9
   skilled attention. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 9:297. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2015.00297 Doll, A., Hölzel, B. K., Boucard, C. C., Wohlschläger, A. M., and Sorg, C. (2015).
Clark, K. B., Naritoku, D. K., Smith, D. C., Browning, R. A., and Jensen, R. A. Mindfulness is associated with intrinsic functional connectivity between default
   (1999). Enhanced recognition memory following vagus nerve stimulation in mode and salience networks. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 9:461. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.
   human subjects. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 94–98. doi: 10.1038/4600              2015.00461
Cohen, H., and Benjamin, J. (2006). Power spectrum analysis and cardiovascular Drevets, W. C., Price, J. L., and Furey, M. L. (2008). Brain structural and functional
   morbidity in anxiety disorders. Auton. Neurosci. 128, 1–8. doi: 10.1016/j. abnormalities in mood disorders: implications for neurocircuitry models of
   autneu.2005.06.007                                                      depression. Brain Struct. Funct. 213, 93–118. doi: 10.1007/s00429-008-0189-x
Colcombe, S., and Kramer, A. F. (2003). Fitness effects on the cognitive function Duman, R. S., and Monteggia, L. M. (2006). A neurotrophic model for stress-
   of older adults. Psychol. Sci. 14, 125–130. doi: 10.1111/1467-9280.t01-1-01430 related mood disorders. Biol. Psychiatry 59, 1116–1127. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.
Colzato, L. S., Ozturk, A., and Hommel, B. (2012). Meditate to create: the impact of 2006.02.013
   focused-attention and open-monitoring training on convergent and divergent Eberth, J., and Sedlmeier, P. (2012). The effects of mindfulness meditation: a meta-
   thinking. Front. Psychol. 3:116. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00116          analysis. Mindfulness 3, 174–189. doi: 10.1007/s12671-012-0101-x
Colzato, L. S., Sellaro, R., Samara, I., Baas, M., and Hommel, B. (2015a). Eckberg, D. L. (2003). The human respiratory gate. J. Physiol. 548, 339–352.
   Meditation-induced states predict attentional control over time. Conscious. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2002.037192
   Cogn. 37, 57–62. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2015.08.006                   Eckberg, D. L., and Eckberg, M. J. (1982). Human sinus node responses
Colzato, L. S., Sellaro, R., Samara, I., and Hommel, B. (2015b). Meditation-induced to repetitive, ramped carotid baroreceptor stimuli. Am. J. Physiol. 242,
   cognitive-control states regulate response-conflict adaptation: evidence from H638–H644. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.1982.242.4.h638
   trial-to-trial adjustments in the Simon task. Conscious. Cogn. 35, 110–114. Egan, H. D. (1991). An Anthology of Christian Mysticism. Collegeville: The
   doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2015.04.012                                       Liturgical Press.
Conrad, A., Müller, A., Doberenz, S., Kim, S., Meuret, A. E., Wollburg, E., Elenkov, I. J., and Chrousos, G. P. (2002). Stress hormones, proinflammatory
   et al. (2007). Psychophysiological effects of breathing instructions for stress and antiinflammatory cytokines, and autoimmunity. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 966,
   management. Appl. Psychophysiol. Biofeedback 32, 89–98. doi: 10.1007/s10484- 290–303. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2002.tb04229.x
   007-9034-x                                                           Fan, J., McCandliss, B. D., Fossella, J., Flombaum, J. I., and Posner, M. I. (2005).
Coupland, R. E., Parker, T. L., Kesse, W. K., and Mohamed, A. A. (1989). The The activation of attentional networks. Neuroimage 26, 471–479. doi: 10.1016/j.
   innervation of the adrenal gland. III. Vagal innervation. J. Anat. 163, 173–181. neuroimage.2005.02.004
Cramer, H., Lauche, R., Langhorst, J., and Dobos, G. (2013). Yoga for depression: Fang, J., Rong, P., Hong, Y., Fan, Y., Liu, J., Wang, H., et al. (2016). Transcutaneous
   a systematic review and meta-analysis. Depress. Anxiety 30, 1068–1083.  vagus nerve stimulation modulates default mode network in major depressive
   doi: 10.1002/da.22166                                                   disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 79, 266–273. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.
Critchley, H. D., and Garfinkel, S. N. (2015). Interactions between visceral afferent 03.025
   signaling and stimulus processing. Front. Neurosci. 9:286. doi: 10.3389/fnins. Faurholt-Jepsen, M., Kessing, L. V., and Munkholm, K. (2017). Heart rate
   2015.00286                                                              variability in bipolar disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Neurosci.
Critchley, H. D., Mathias, C. J., Josephs, O., O’Doherty, J., Zanini, S.,  Biobehav. Rev. 73, 68–80. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.12.007
   Dewar, B. K., et al. (2003). Human cingulate cortex and autonomic control: Felger, J., and Lotrich, F. (2013). Inflammatory cytokines in depression:
   converging neuroimaging and clinical evidence. Brain 126, 2139–2152.    neurobiological mechanisms and therapeutic implications. Neuroscience 246,
   doi: 10.1093/brain/awg216                                               199–229. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.04.060
Critchley, H. D., Nicotra, A., Chiesa, P. A., Nagai, Y., Gray, M. A., Minati, L., Flavell, J. H. (1976). ‘‘Metacognitive aspects of problem solving,’’ in The Nature of
   et al. (2015). Slow breathing and hypoxic challenge: cardiorespiratory  Intelligence, ed. L. B. Resnick (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum), 231–235.
   consequences and their central neural substrates. PLoS One 10:e0127082. Forbes, D., Forbes, S. C., Blake, C. M., Thiessen, E. J., and Blake, C. M. (2013).
   doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127082                                       Exercise programs for people with dementia. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.
Cysarz, D., and Büssing, A. (2005). Cardiorespiratory synchronization during Zen 4:CD006489. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006489.pub3
   meditation. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 95, 88–95. doi: 10.1007/s00421-005-1379-3 Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Vincent, J. L., Corbetta, M., Van Essen, D. C., and
Dahl, C. J., Lutz, A., and Davidson, R. J. (2015). Reconstructing and deconstructing Raichle, M. E. (2005). From The Cover: the human brain is intrinsically
   the self: cognitive mechanisms in meditation practice. Trends Cogn. Sci. 19, organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks. Proc. Natl. Acad.
   515–523. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2015.07.001                                Sci. U S A 102, 9673–9678. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0504136102
Damasio, A. (2003). Feelings of emotion and the self. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 1001, Frangos, E., Ellrich, J., and Komisaruk, B. R. (2015). Non-invasive access to the
   253–261. doi: 10.1196/annals.1279.014                                   vagus nerve central projections via electrical stimulation of the external ear:
Dantzer, R., O’Connor, J. C., Freund, G. G., Johnson, R. W., and Kelley, K. W. fMRI evidence in humans. Brain Stimul. 8, 624–636. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2014.
   (2008). From inflammation to sickness and depression: when the immune   11.018
   system subjugates the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 46–56. doi: 10.1038/nrn2297 Freeman, R. (2006). Assessment of cardiovascular autonomic function. Clin.
Danucalov, M. Á. D., Simões, R. S., Kozasa, E. H., and Leite, J. R. (2008). Neurophysiol. 117, 716–730. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2005.09.027
   Cardiorespiratory and metabolic changes during yoga sessions: the effects of Froeliger, B., Garland, E. L., and McClernon, F. J. (2012). Yoga meditation
   respiratory exercises and meditation practices. Appl. Psychophysiol. Biofeedback practitioners exhibit greater gray matter volume and fewer reported
   33, 77–81. doi: 10.1007/s10484-008-9053-2                               cognitive failures: results of a preliminary voxel-based morphometric analysis.


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org                 18                                    October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                                            Breathing in Contemplative Practice


   Evid. Based Complement. Alternat. Med. 2012:821307. doi: 10.1155/2012/ Haroon, E., Raison, C. L., and Miller, A. H. (2011). Psychoneuroimmunology
   821307                                                                  meets neuropsychopharmacology: translational implications of the impact
Garcia, A. J. III., Koschnitzky, J. E., Dashevskiy, T., and Ramirez, J. M. (2013). of inflammation on behavior. Neuropsychopharmacology 37, 137–162.
   Cardiorespiratory coupling in health and disease. Auton. Neurosci. 175, 26–37. doi: 10.1038/npp.2011.205
   doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2013.02.006                                    Hartley, L., Flowers, N., Lee, M. S., Ernst, E., and Rees, K. (2014a). Tai chi for
Gard, T., Hölzel, B. K., and Lazar, S. W. (2013). The potential effects of meditation primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.
   on age-related cognitive decline: a systematic review. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 1307, 4:CD010366. doi: 10.1002/14651858.cd010366
   89–103. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12348                                      Hartley, L., Mavrodaris, A., Flowers, N., Ernst, E., and Rees, K. (2014b).
Gard, T., Noggle, J. J., Park, C. L., Vago, D. R., and Wilson, A. (2014). Potential Transcendental meditation for the primary prevention of cardiovascular
   self-regulatory mechanisms of yoga for psychological health. Front. Hum. disease (Review). Cochrane   Database  Syst.  Rev.  12:CD010359.
   Neurosci. 8:770. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00770                          doi: 10.1002/14651858.cd010359
Geneen, L. J., Moore, R. A., Clarke, C., Martin, D., Colvin, L. A., and Hartley, L., Lee, M. S., Kwong, J. S. W., Flowers, N., Todkill, D., Ernst, E., et al.
   Smith, B. H. (2017). Physical activity and exercise for chronic pain in adults: (2015). Qigong for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cochrane
   an overview of Cochrane Reviews. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 1:CD011279. Database Syst. Rev. 6:CD010390. doi: 10.1002/14651858.cd010390
   doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD011279.pub2                                  Hasenkamp, W., and Barsalou, L. W. (2012). Effects of meditation experience on
Ghacibeh, G. A., Shenker, J. I., Shenal, B., Uthman, B. M., and Heilman, K. M. functional connectivity of distributed brain networks. Front. Hum. Neurosci.
   (2006). The influence of vagus nerve stimulation on memory. Cogn. Behav. 6:38. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00038
   Neurol. 19, 119–122. doi: 10.1097/01.wnn.0000213908.34278.7d         Henry, T. R. (2002). Therapeutic mechanisms of vagus nerve stimulation.
Gold, P. W., and Chrousos, G. P. (2002). Organization of the stress system and Neurology 59, S3–S14. doi: 10.1212/wnl.59.6_suppl_4.s3
   its dysregulation in melancholic and atypical depression: high vs. low CRH/NE Heran, B. S., Chen, J. M., Ebrahim, S., Moxham, T., Oldridge, N., Rees, K.,
   states. Mol. Psychiatry 7, 254–275. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001032          et al. (2011). Exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation for coronary heart disease.
Gong, Q., and He, Y. (2015). Depression, neuroimaging and connectomics: a  Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 7:CD001800. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001800.
   selective overview. Biol. Psychiatry 77, 223–235. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2014. pub2
   08.009                                                               Herbert,  A.,  and  Esparham,   A.  (2017).  Mind-Body   therapy  for
Gothe, N. P., and Mcauley, E. (2015). Yoga and cognition: a meta-analysis of children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Children 4:E31.
   chronic and acute effects. Psychosom. Med. 77, 784–797. doi: 10.1097/psy. doi: 10.3390/children4050031
   0000000000000218                                                     Hering, K. E. K. (1868). Die Selbststeuerung der Athmung durch den Nervus
Gothe, N., Pontifex, M. B., Hillman, C., and McAuley, E. (2013). The acute vagus. Sitzungsber. Kaiserlichen Akad. Wiss. 57, 672–677.
   effects of yoga on executive function. J. Phys. Act. Health 10, 488–495. Hill, L. K., Hu, D. D., Koenig, J., Sollers, J. J. III., Kapuku, G., Wang, X., et al.
   doi: 10.1123/jpah.10.4.488                                              (2015). Ethnic differences in resting heart rate variability: a systematic review
Gratton, C., Sun, H., and Petersen, S. E. (2018). Control networks and hubs. and meta-analysis. Psychosom. Med. 77, 16–25 doi: 10.1097/psy.0000000000
   Psychophysiology 55:e13032. doi: 10.1111/psyp.13032                     000133
Green, C. S., and Bavelier, D. (2012). Learning, attentional control and action video Hirsch, J. A., and Bishop, B. (1981). Respiratory sinus arrhythmia in humans:
   games. Curr. Biol. 22, R197–R206. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.02.012        how breathing pattern modulates heart rate. Am. J. Physiol. 241, H620–H629.
Grossman, P. (2014). Mindfulness: awareness informed by an embodied ethic. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.1981.241.4.h620
   Mindfulness 6, 17–22. doi: 10.1007/s12671-014-0372-5                 Hoffmann, T. J., Simon, B. J., Zhang, Y., and Emala, C. W. (2012). Low voltage
Grossman, P., and Kollai, M. (1993). Respiratory sinus arrhythmia, cardiac vagal nerve stimulation reduces bronchoconstriction in guinea pigs through
   vagal tone, and respiration: within- and between-individual relations.  catecholamine release. Neuromodulation 15, 527–535. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-
   Psychophysiology 30, 486–495. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.1993.tb02072.x   1403.2012.00454.x
Grossman, P., Niemann, L., Schmidt, S., and Walach, H. (2004). Mindfulness- Hofmann, S. G., Grossman, P., and Hinton, D. E. (2011). Loving-kindness
   based stress reduction and health benefits: a meta-analysis. J. Psychosom. Res. and compassion meditation: potential for psychological interventions. Clin.
   57, 35–43. doi: 10.1016/S0022-3999(03)00573-7                           Psychol. Rev. 31, 1126–1132. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2011.07.003
Grossman, P., and Taylor, E. W. (2007). Toward understanding respiratory sinus Hölzel, B. K., Carmody, J., Evans, K. C., Hoge, E. A., Dusek, J. A., Morgan, L., et al.
   arrhythmia: relations to cardiac vagal tone, evolution and biobehavioral (2010). Stress reduction correlates with structural changes in the amygdala. Soc.
   functions. Biol. Psychol. 74, 263–285. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2005.   Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 5, 11–17. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsp034
   11.014                                                               Hölzel, B. K., Carmody, J., Vangel, M., Congleton, C., Yerramsetti, S. M., Gard, T.,
Groves, D. A., and Brown, V. J. (2005). Vagal nerve stimulation: a review of et al. (2011a). Mindfulness practice leads to increases in regional brain gray
   its applications and potential mechanisms that mediate its clinical effects. matter density. Psychiatry Res. 191, 36–43. doi: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2010.
   Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 29, 493–500. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2005.01.004 08.006
Haensel, A., Mills, P. J., Nelesen, R. A., Ziegler, M. G., and Dimsdale, J. E. Hölzel, B. K., Lazar, S. W., Gard, T., Schuman-Olivier, Z., Vago, D. R., and Ott, U.
   (2008). The relationship between heart rate variability and inflammatory (2011b). How does mindfulness meditation work? Proposing mechanisms of
   markers in cardiovascular diseases. Psychoneuroendocrinology 33, 1305–1312. action from a conceptual and neural perspective. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 6,
   doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2008.08.007                                     537–559. doi: 10.1177/1745691611419671
Hajnšek, S., Šulenti ´c,V., Samarzˇ ija, M., Mijatovi ´c,D., Petelin, Z., Nankovi ´c,S., Hommel, B. (2015). Between persistence and flexibility: the Yin and Yang of action
   et al. (2010). Bronchoconstriction induced by vagus nerve stimulation for the control. Adv. Motiv. Sci. 2, 33–67. doi: 10.1016/bs.adms.2015.04.003
   management of pharmacoresistant epilepsy in a patient with bronchial asthma: Hommel, B., and Colzato, L. S. (2017). Meditation and metacontrol. J. Cogn.
   case report. Neurol. Croat. 59, 89–93.                                  Enhanc. 1, 115–121. doi: 10.1007/s41465-017-0017-4
Hansen, A. L., Johnsen, B. H., Sollers, J. J. III., Stenvik, K., and Thayer, J. F. Hommel, B., and Wiers, R. W. (2017). Towards a unitary approach to
   (2004). Heart rate variability and its relation to prefrontal cognitive function: human action control. Trends Cogn. Sci. 12, 940–949. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2017.
   the effects of training and detraining. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 93, 263–272. 09.009
   doi: 10.1007/s00421-004-1208-0                                       Hottenrott, K., Hoos, O., and Esperer, H. D. (2006). Heart rate variability and
Hansen, A. L., Johnsen, B. H., and Thayer, J. F. (2003). Vagal influence on working physical exercise. Current status. Herz 31, 544–552. doi: 10.1007/s00059-006-
   memory and attention. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 48, 263–274. doi: 10.1016/s0167- 2855-1
   8760(03)00073-4                                                      Jacobs, H. I., Riphagen, J. M., Razat, C. M., Wiese, S., and Sack, A. T. (2015).
Hare, D. L., Toukhsati, S. R., Johansson, P., and Jaarsma, T. (2014). Depression Transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation boosts associative memory in older
   and cardiovascular disease: a clinical review. Eur. Heart J. 35, 1365–1372. individuals. Neurobiol. Aging 36, 1860–1867. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.
   doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/eht462                                           2015.02.023


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org                 19                                    October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                                            Breathing in Contemplative Practice


Jahnke, R., Larkey, L., Rogers, C., Etnier, J., and Lin, F. (2010). A comprehensive Kolárˇ , P., Neuwirth, J., Sˇ anda, J., Suchánek, V., Svatá, Z., Volejník, J., et al.
   review of health benefits of Qigong and Tai Chi. Am. J. Health Promot. 24, (2009). Analysis of diaphragm movement during tidal breathing and during
   e1–e25. doi: 10.4278/ajhp.081013-lit-248                                its activation while breath holding using MRI synchronized with spirometry.
Jänig, W., Krauspe, R., and Wiedersatz, G. (1983). Reflex activation of    Physiol. Res. 58, 383–392. doi: 10.1093/ehjci/jeu087
   postganglionic vasoconstrictor neurones supplying skeletal muscle by Kollai, M., and Mizsei, G. (1990). Respiratory sinus arrhythmia is a limited
   stimulation of arterial chemoreceptors via non-nicotinic synaptic mechanisms measure of cardiac parasympathetic control in man. J. Physiol. 424, 329–342.
   in sympathetic ganglia. Pflugers Arch. 396, 95–100. doi: 10.1007/bf006  doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1990.sp018070
   15511                                                                Koltyn, K. F., Brellenthin, A. G., Cook, D. B., Sehgal, N., and Hillard, C.
Jha, A. P., Krompinger, J., and Baime, M. J. (2007). Mindfulness training  (2014). Mechanisms of exercise-induced hypoalgesia. J. Pain 15, 1294–1304.
   modifies subsystems of attention. Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 7, 109–119. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2014.09.006
   doi: 10.3758/cabn.7.2.109                                            Korsager Larsen, M., and Matchkov, V. V. (2016). Hypertension and physical
Johnson, R. L., and Wilson, C. G. (2018). A review of vagus nerve stimulation exercise: the role of oxidative stress. Medicina 52, 19–27. doi: 10.1016/j.medici.
   as a therapeutic intervention. J. Inflamm. Res. 11, 203–213. doi: 10.2147/jir. 2016.01.005
   s163248                                                              Kosel, M., Brockmann, H., Frick, C., Zobel, A., and Schlaepfer, T. E. (2011).
Kaiser, R. H., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Wager, T. D., and Pizzagalli, D. A.   Chronic vagus nerve stimulation for treatment-resistant depression increases
   (2015). Large-scale network dysfunction in major depressive disorder: a regional cerebral blood flow in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Psychiatry
   meta-analysis of resting-state functional connectivity. JAMA Psychiatry 72, Res. 191, 153–159. doi: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2010.11.004
   603–611. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.0071                       Kraus, T., Kiess, O., Hösl, K., Terekhin, P., Kornhuber, J., and Forster, C. (2013).
Kemp, A. H., and Quintana, D. S. (2013). The relationship between mental   CNS BOLD fMRI effects of sham-controlled transcutaneous electrical nerve
   and physical health: insights from the study of heart rate variability. Int. stimulation in the left outer auditory canal—a pilot study. Brain Stimul. 6,
   J. Psychophysiol. 89, 288–296. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2013.06.018      798–804. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2013.01.011
Keng, S. L., Smoski, M. J., and Robins, C. J. (2011). Effects of mindfulness on Krisanaprakornkit, T., Witoonchart, C., Ngamjarus, C., and Piyavhatkul, N.
   psychological health: a review of empirical studies. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 31, (2010). Meditation therapies for attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
   1041–1056. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2011.04.006                               Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 6:CD006507. doi: 10.1002/14651858.cd006507
Kerr, C. E., Agrawal, U., and Nayak, S. (2016). The effects of Tai Chi practice Kuyken, W., Hayes, R., Barrett, B., Byng, R., Dalgleish, T., Kessler, D., et al. (2015).
   on intermuscular beta coherence and the rubber hand illusion. Front. Hum. Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy
   Neurosci. 10:37. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00037                          compared with maintenance antidepressant treatment in the prevention of
Kerr, C. E., Jones, S. R., Wan, Q., Pritchett, D. L., Wasserman, R. H., Wexler, A., depressive relapse or recurrence (PREVENT): a randomised controlled trial.
   et al. (2011). Effects of mindfulness meditation training on anticipatory alpha Lancet 386, 63–73. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)62222-4
   modulation in primary somatosensory cortex. Brain Res. Bull. 85, 96–103. Kwan, H., Garzoni, L., Liu, H. L., Cao, M., Desrochers, A., Fecteau, G., et al. (2016).
   doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2011.03.026                                 Vagus nerve stimulation for treatment of inflammation: systematic review of
Kerr, C. E., Sacchet, M. D., Lazar, S. W., Moore, C. I., and Jones, S. R. (2013). animal models and clinical studies. Bioelectron. Med. 3, 1–6.
   Mindfulness starts with the body: somatosensory attention and top-down Laborde, S., Mosley, E., and Thayer, J. F. (2017). Heart rate variability and
   modulation of cortical alpha rhythms in mindfulness meditation. Front. Hum. cardiac vagal tone in psychophysiological research—recommendations for
   Neurosci. 7:12. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00012                           experiment planning, data analysis and data reporting. Front. Psychol. 8:213.
Kerr, C. E., Shaw, J. R., Wasserman, R. H., Chen, V. W., Kanojia, K., Bayer, T., doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00213
   et al. (2008). Tactile acuity in experienced Tai Chi practitioners: evidence for Lampert, R., Bremner, J. D., Su, S., Miller, A., Lee, F., Cheema, F., et al. (2008).
   use dependent plasticity as an effect of sensory-attentional training. Exp. Brain Decreased heart rate variability is associated with higher levels of inflammation
   Res. 188, 317–322. doi: 10.1007/s00221-008-1409-6                       in middle-aged men. Am. Heart J. 156, 759.e1–759.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2008.
Keshavan, M. S., Vinogradov, S., Rumsey, J., Sherrill, J., and Wagner, A. (2014). 07.009
   Cognitive training in mental disorders: update and future directions. Am. Lan, C., Chen, S.-Y., Wong, M.-K., and Lai, J. S. (2013). Tai Chi Chuan exercise for
   J. Psychiatry 171, 510–522. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2013.13081075         patients with cardiovascular disease. Evid. Based Complement. Alternat. Med.
Kessler, W., Diedrich, S., Menges, P., Ebker, T., Nielson, M., Partecke, L. I., 2013:e983208. doi: 10.1155/2013/983208
   et al. (2012). The role of the Vagus Nerve: modulation of the inflammatory Lane, R. D., McRae, K., Reiman, E. M., Chen, K., Ahern, G. L., and Thayer, J. F.
   reaction in murine polymicrobial sepsis. Mediators Inflamm. 2012:467620. (2009). Neural correlates of heart rate variability during emotion. Neuroimage
   doi: 10.1155/2012/467620                                                44, 213–222. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.07.056
Keyl, C., Schneider, A., Dambacher, M., and Bernardi, L. (2001). Time delay Lane, R. D., Reiman, E. M., Ahern, G. L., and Thayer, J. F. (2001). 21.
   of vagally mediated cardiac baroreflex response varies with autonomic   Activity in medial prefrontal cortex correlates with vagal component
   cardiovascular control. J. Appl. Physiol. 91, 283–289. doi: 10.1152/jappl.2001. of heart rate variability during emotion. Brain Cogn. 47, 97–100.
   91.1.283                                                                doi: 10.1006/brcg.2000.1275
Kim, S. H., Schneider, S. M., Kravitz, L., Mermier, C., and Burge, M. R. (2013). Langley, J. D. (1903). The autonomic nervous system. Brain 26, 1–26.
   Mind-body practices for posttraumatic stress disorder. J. Investig. Med. 61, doi: 10.1093/brain/26.1.1
   827–834. doi: 10.2310/JIM.0b013e3182906862                           Larkey, L., Jahnke, R., Etnier, J., and Gonzalez, J. (2009). Meditative movement as
Kirk, U., Downar, J., and Montague, P. R. (2011). Interoception drives increased a category of exercise: implications for research. J. Phys. Act. Health 6, 230–238.
   rational decision-making in meditators playing the ultimatum game. Front. doi: 10.1123/jpah.6.2.230
   Neurosci. 5:49. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2011.00049                        Larsen, P. D., Tzeng, Y. C., Sin, P. Y. W., and Galletly, D. C. (2010). Respiratory
Kirkwood, G., Rampes, H., Tuffrey, V., Richardson, J., and Pilkington, K. (2005). sinus arrhythmia in conscious humans during spontaneous respiration. Respir.
   Yoga for anxiety: a systematic review of the research evidence. Br. J. Sports Med. Physiol. Neurobiol. 174, 111–118. doi: 10.1016/j.resp.2010.04.021
   39, 884–891. doi: 10.1136/bjsm.2005.018069                           Lazar, S. W., Kerr, C. E., Wasserman, R. H., Gray, J. R., Greve, D. N.,
Klainin-Yobas, P., Cho, M. A. A., and Creedy, D. (2012). Efficacy of mindfulness- Treadway, M. T., et al. (2005). Meditation experience is associated with
   based interventions on depressive symptoms among people with mental     increased cortical thickness. Neuroreport 16, 1893–1897. doi: 10.1097/01.wnr.
   disorders: a meta-analysis. Int. J. Nurs. Stud. 49, 109–121. doi: 10.1016/j. 0000186598.66243.19
   ijnurstu.2011.08.014                                                 Lee, M. S., and Ernst, E. (2012). Systematic reviews of t’ai chi: an overview. Br.
Koenig, J., Kemp, A. H., Beauchaine, T. P., Thayer, J. F., and Kaess, M.   J. Sports Med. 46, 713–718. doi: 10.1136/bjsm.2010.080622
   (2016). Depression and resting state heart rate variability in children and Lee, J. S., Lee, M. S., Lee, J. Y., Cornélissen, G., Otsuka, K., and Halberg, F. (2003).
   adolescents—A systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 46, Effects of diaphragmatic breathing on ambulatory blood pressure and heart
   136–150. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2016.04.013                                 rate. Biomed. Pharmacother. 57, 87s–91s. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2003.08.011


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org                 20                                    October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                                            Breathing in Contemplative Practice


Lehrer, P. M., and Gevirtz, R. (2014). Heart rate variability biofeedback: how and cardiac sympathetic tone nor of baroreflex sensitivity. Am. J. Physiol. Heart
   why does it work? Front. Psychol. 5:756. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00756  Circ. Physiol. 307, H1005–H1012. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00361.2014
Lehrer, P. M., Vaschillo, E., Vaschillo, B., Lu, S.-E., Eckberg, D. L., Edelberg, R., Martelli, D., Yao, S. T., McKinley, M. J., and McAllen, R. M. (2014c). Reflex
   et al. (2003). Heart rate variability biofeedback increases baroreflex gain control of inflammation by sympathetic nerves, not the vagus. J. Physiol. 592,
   and peak expiratory flow. Psychosom. Med. 65, 796–805. doi: 10.1097/01.psy. 1677–1686. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2013.268573
   0000089200.81962.19                                                  McCorry, L. M. (2007). Physiology of the autonomic nervous system. Am.
Levenson, R. W. (1994). Human emotion: a functional view. The Nature of    J. Pharm. Educ. 71:78. doi: 10.5688/aj710478
   Emotion: Fundamental Questions, eds P. Ekman and R. Davidson (New York, McEwen, B. S., Eiland, L., Hunter, R. G., and Miller, M. M. (2012). Stress
   NY: Oxford University Press), 123–126.                                  and anxiety: structural plasticity and epigenetic regulation as a consequence
Lin, G., Xiang, Q., Fu, X., Wang, S., Wang, S., Chen, S., et al. (2012). Heart rate of stress. Neuropharmacology 62, 3–12. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.
   variability biofeedback decreases blood pressure in prehypertensive subjects by 07.014
   improving autonomic function and baroreflex. J. Altern. Complement. Med. 18, McEwen, B., and Morrison, J. (2013). The brain on stress: vulnerability and
   143–152. doi: 10.1089/acm.2010.0607                                     plasticity of the prefrontal cortex over the life course. Neuron 79, 16–29.
Lippelt, D. P., Hommel, B., and Colzato, L. S. (2014). Focused attention,  doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.06.028
   open monitoring and loving kindness meditation: effects on attention, Mead, G. E., Morley, W., Campbell, P., Greig, C. A., McMurdo, M., and
   conflict monitoring and creativity—A review. Front. Psychol. 5:1083.    Lawlor, D. A. (2009). Exercise for depression. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.
   doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01083                                           3:CD004366. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD004366.pub3
Liu, J., Fang, J., Wang, Z., Rong, P., Hong, Y., Fan, Y., et al. (2016). Transcutaneous Melby-Lervåg, M., and Hulme, C. (2013). Is working memory training
   vagus nerve stimulation modulates amygdala functional connectivity in   effective? A meta-analytic review. Dev. Psychol. 49, 270–291. doi: 10.1037/a00
   patients with depression. J. Affect. Disord. 205, 319–326. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2016. 28228
   08.003                                                               Melville, G. W., Chang, D., Colagiuri, B., Marshall, P. W., and Cheema, B. S.
Luders, E., Clark, K., Narr, K. L., and Toga, A. W. (2011). Enhanced brain (2012). Fifteen minutes  of chair-based yoga  postures or  guided
   connectivity in long-term meditation practitioners. Neuroimage 57, 1308–1316. meditation performed in the office can elicit a relaxation response.
   doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.05.075                                   Evid. Based Complement. Alternat. Med. 2012:501986. doi: 10.1155/2012/
Luders, E., Kurth, F., Mayer, E. A., Toga, A. W., Narr, K. L., and Gaser, C. 501986
   (2012a). The unique brain anatomy of meditation practitioners: alterations Ménard, C., Pfau, M. L., Hodes, G. E., and Russo, S. J. (2017). Immune
   in cortical gyrification. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 6:34. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012. and neuroendocrine mechanisms of stress vulnerability and resilience.
   00034                                                                   Neuropsychopharmacology 42, 62–80. doi: 10.1038/npp.2016.90
Luders, E., Phillips, O. R., Clark, K., Kurth, F., Toga, A. W., and Narr, K. L. (2012b). Miller, E. B., and Goss, C. F. (2014). An exploration of physiological responses to
   Bridging the hemispheres in meditation: thicker callosal regions and enhanced the Native American flute. ArXiv:1401.6004
   fractional anisotropy (FA) in long-term practitioners. Neuroimage 61, 181–187. Miller, A. H., Maletic, V., and Raison, C. L. (2009). Inflammation and its
   doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.02.026                                   discontents: the role of cytokines in the pathophysiology of major depression.
Luders, E., Thompson, P. M., Kurth, F., Hong, J. Y., Phillips, O. R., Wang, Y., et al. Biol. Psychiatry 65, 732–741. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.11.029
   (2012c). Global and regional alterations of hippocampal anatomy in long-term Miner, J. R., Lewis, L. M., Mosnaim, G. S., Varon, J., Theodoro, D., and
   meditation practitioners. Hum. Brain Mapp. 34, 3369–3375. doi: 10.1002/hbm. Hoffmann, T. J. (2012). Feasibility of percutaneous vagus nerve stimulation for
   22153                                                                   the treatment of acute asthma exacerbations. Acad. Emerg. Med. 19, 421–429.
Luders, E., Toga, A. W., Lepore, N., and Gaser, C. (2009). The underlying  doi: 10.1111/j.1553-2712.2012.01329.x
   anatomical correlates of long-term meditation: larger hippocampal and frontal Mitchell, J. T., Zylowska, L., and Kollins, S. H. (2015). Mindfulness meditation
   volumes of gray matter. Neuroimage 45, 672–678. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage. training for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in adulthood: current
   2008.12.061                                                             empirical support, treatment overview and future directions. Cogn. Behav.
Lutz, A., Jha, A. P., Dunne, J. D., and Saron, C. D. (2015). Investigating Pract. 22, 172–191. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpra.2014.10.002
   the phenomenological matrix of mindfulness-related practices from a  Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M. J., Witzki, A. H., Howerter, A., and
   neurocognitive perspective. Am. Psychol. 70, 632–658. doi: 10.1037/a00  Wager, T. D. (2000). The unity and diversity of executive functions and their
   39585                                                                   contributions to complex ‘‘Frontal Lobe’’ tasks: a latent variable analysis. Cogn.
Lutz, A., Slagter, H. A., Dunne, J. D., and Davidson, R. J. (2008). Attention Psychol. 41, 49–100. doi: 10.1006/cogp.1999.0734
   regulation and monitoring in meditation. Trends Cogn. Sci. 12, 163–169. Montgomery, G. T. (1994). Slowed respiration training. Biofeedback Self Regul. 19,
   doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2008.01.005                                         211–225. doi: 10.1007/bf01721068
Lutz, A., Slagter, H. A., Rawlings, N. B., Francis, A. D., Greischar, L. L., Morgan, N., Irwin, M. R., Chung, M., and Wang, C. (2014). The effects
   and  Davidson, R. J. (2009). Mental training  enhances  attentional     of mind-body therapies on the immune system: meta-analysis. PLoS One
   stability: neural and behavioral evidence. J. Neurosci. 29, 13418–13427. 9:e100903. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100903
   doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1614-09.2009                                  Mortola, J., Marghescu, D., and Siegrist-Johnstone, R. (2015). Respiratory sinus
Luu, K., and Hall, P. A. (2016). Hatha Yoga and executive function: a systematic arrhythmia in young men and women at different chest wall configurations.
   review. J. Altern. Complement. Med. 22, 125–133. doi: 10.1089/acm.2014.0091 Clin. Sci. 128, 507–516. doi: 10.1042/cs20140543
Markil, N., Whitehurst, M., Jacobs, P. L., and Zoeller, R. F. (2012). Yoga Nidra Müller, H. H. O., Moeller, S., Lücke, C., Lam, A. P., Braun, N., and Philipsen, A.
   relaxation increases heart rate variability and is unaffected by a prior bout of (2018). Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) and other augmentation strategies for
   Hatha Yoga. J. Altern. Complement. Med. 18, 953–958. doi: 10.1089/acm.2011. therapy-resistant depression (TRD): review of the evidence and clinical advice
   0331                                                                    for use. Front. Neurosci. 12:239. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00239
Martarelli, D., Cocchioni, M., Scuri, S., and Pompei, P. (2011). Diaphragmatic Murray, A. R., Atkinson, L., Mahadi, M. K., Deuchars, S. A., and Deuchars, J.
   breathing reduces postprandial oxidative stress. J. Altern. Complement. Med. (2016). The strange case of the ear and the heart: the auricular vagus nerve and
   17, 623–628. doi: 10.1089/acm.2010.0666                                 its influence on cardiac control. Auton. Neurosci. 199, 48–53. doi: 10.1016/j.
Martelli, D., Farmer, D. G. S., and Yao, S. T. (2016). The splanchnic      autneu.2016.06.004
   anti-inflammatory pathway: could it be the efferent arm of the inflammatory Nagai, Y., Critchley, H. D., Featherstone, E., Trimble, M. R., and Dolan, R. J.
   reflex? Exp. Physiol. 101, 1245–1252. doi: 10.1113/ep085559             (2004). Activity in ventromedial prefrontal cortex covaries with sympathetic
Martelli, D., McKinley, M. J., and McAllen, R. M. (2014a). The cholinergic skin conductance level: a physiological account of a ‘‘default mode’’ of brain
   anti-inflammatory pathway: a critical review. Auton. Neurosci. 182, 65–69. function. Neuroimage 22, 243–251. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.01.019
   doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2013.12.007                                    Nesvold, A., Fagerland, M. W., Davanger, S., Ellingsen, Ø., Solberg, E. E.,
Martelli, D., Silvani, A., McAllen, R. M., May, C. N., and Ramchandra, R. (2014b). Holen, A., et al. (2012). Increased heart rate variability during nondirective
   The low frequency power of heart rate variability is neither a measure of meditation. Eur. J. Prev. Cardiol. 19, 773–780. doi: 10.1177/1741826711414625


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org                 21                                    October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                                            Breathing in Contemplative Practice


Niijima, A. (1992). Electrophysiological study on the vagal innervation of the Porges, S. W. (1995). Cardiac vagal tone: a physiological index of stress. Neurosci.
   adrenal gland in the rat. J. Auton. Nerv. Syst. 41, 87–92. doi: 10.1016/0165- Biobehav. Rev. 19, 225–233. doi: 10.1016/0149-7634(94)00066-a
   1838(92)90130-9                                                      Porges, S. W. (2001). The polyvagal theory: phylogenetic substrates of a
Nizamie, S. H., Katshu, M. U. H., and Uvais, N. (2013). Sufism and mental health. social nervous system. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 42, 123–146. doi: 10.1016/s0167-
   Indian J. Psychiatry 55, s215–s223. doi: 10.4103/0019-5545.105535       8760(01)00162-3
Obrist, P. A. (1981). Cardiovascular Psychophysiology: A Perspective. New York, Porges, S. W. (2007). The polyvagal perspective. Biol. Psychol. 74, 116–143.
   NY: Plenum Press.                                                       doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2006.06.009
Ochsner, K. N., Knierim, K., Ludlow, D. H., Hanelin, J., Ramachandran, T., Posadzki, P., Cramer, H., Kuzdzal, A., Lee, M. S., and Ernst, E. (2014). Yoga for
   Glover, G., et al. (2004). Reflecting upon feelings: an fMRI study of neural hypertension: a systematic review of randomized clinical trials. Complement.
   systems supporting the attribution of emotion to self and other. J. Cogn. Ther. Med. 22, 511–522. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2014.03.009
   Neurosci. 16, 1746–1772. doi: 10.1162/0898929042947829               Posner, M. I., and Petersen, S. E. (1990). The attention system of the human brain.
Oliveira, R. S., Barker, A. R., Wilkinson, K. M., Abbott, R. A., and Williams, C. A. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 25–42. doi: 10.1146/annurev.ne.13.030190.000325
   (2017). Is cardiac autonomic function associated with cardiorespiratory fitness Pramanik, T., Sharma, H. O., Mishra, S., Mishra, A., Prajapati, R., and Singh, S.
   and physical activity in children and adolescents? A systematic review of cross- (2009). Immediate effect of slow pace Bhastrika Pranayama on blood pressure
   sectional studies. Int. J. Cardiol. 236, 113–122. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2017.02.022 and heart rate. J. Altern. Complement. Med. 15, 293–295. doi: 10.1089/acm.
Olshansky, B., Sabbah, H. N., Hauptman, P. J., and Colucci, W. S. (2008).  2008.0440
   Parasympathetic nervous system  and  heart  failure pathophysiology  Radley, J., Morilak, D., Viau, V., and Campeau, S. (2015). Chronic stress and
   and  potential implications for therapy. Circulation 118, 863–871.      brain plasticity: mechanisms underlying adaptive and maladaptive changes
   doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.760405                                  and implications for stress-related CNS disorders. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 58,
Orosz, A., Federspiel, A., Haisch, S., Seeher, C., Dierks, T., and Cattapan, K. (2017). 79–91. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.06.018
   A biological perspective on differences and similarities between burnout and Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W. J., Gusnard, D. A., and
   depression. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 73, 112–122. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev. Shulman, G. L. (2001). A default mode of brain function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
   2016.12.005                                                             USA  98, 676–682. doi: 10.1073/pnas.98.2.676
Ospina, M. B., Bond, K., Karkhaneh, M., Tjosvold, L., Vandermeer, B., Liang, Y., Ramírez, E., Ortega, A. R., and Reyes Del Paso, G. A. (2015). Anxiety, attention
   et al. (2007). Meditation practices for health: state of the research. Evid. Rep. and decision making: the moderating role of heart rate variability. Int.
   Technol. Assess. 155, 1–263.                                            J. Psychophysiol. 98, 490–496. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2015.10.007
Ottaviani, C., Thayer, J. F., Verkuil, B., Lonigro, A., Medea, B., Couyoumdjian, A., Roig, M., Nordbrandt, S., Geertsen, S. S., and Nielsen, J. B. (2013). The effects
   et al. (2016). Physiological concomitants of perseverative cognition:   of cardiovascular exercise on human memory: a review with meta-analysis.
   a systematic review and  meta-analysis. Psychol. Bull. 142, 231–259.    Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 37, 1645–1666. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2013.
   doi: 10.1037/bul0000036                                                 06.012
Pal, G. K., Velkumary, S., and    Madanmohan, A. (2004). Effect   of    Rozanski, A., Blumenthal, J. A., and Kaplan, J. (1999). Impact of psychological
   short-term practice of breathing exercises on autonomic  functions      factors on the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease and implications for
   in normal human    volunteers. Indian J. Med. Res.  120, 115–121.       therapy. Circulation 99, 2192–2217. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.99.16.2192
   doi: 10.1161/hypertensiona.112.194225                                Rubia, K. (2009). The neurobiology of meditation and its clinical effectiveness
Pardo, J. V., Sheikh, S. A., Schwindt, G. C., Lee, J. T., Kuskowski, M. A., Surerus, C., in psychiatric disorders. Biol. Psychol. 82, 1–11. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2009.
   et al. (2008). Chronic vagus nerve stimulation for treatment-resistant  04.003
   depression decreases resting ventromedial prefrontal glucose metabolism. Sakaki, M., Yoo, H. J., Nga, L., Lee, T.-H., Thayer, J. F., and Mather, M. (2016).
   Neuroimage 42, 879–889. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.04.267           Heart rate variability is associated with amygdala functional connectivity with
Park, G., Van Bavel, J. J., Vasey, M. W., and Thayer, J. F. (2012). Cardiac vagal MPFC across younger and older adults. Neuroimage 139, 44–52. doi: 10.1016/j.
   tone predicts inhibited attention to fearful faces. Emotion 12, 1292–1302. neuroimage.2016.05.076
   doi: 10.1037/a0028528                                                Salmon, P. (2001). Effects of physical exercise on anxiety, depression and
Park, G., Van Bavel, J. J., Vasey, M. W., and Thayer, J. F. (2013). Cardiac vagal sensitivity to stress. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 21, 33–61. doi: 10.1016/s0272-
   tone predicts attentional engagement to and disengagement from fearful faces. 7358(99)00032-x
   Emotion 13, 645–656. doi: 10.1037/a0032971                           Sapolsky, R. M., Romero, L. M., and Munck, A. U. (2000). How do glucocorticoids
Pascoe, M. C., Thompson, D. R., Jenkins, Z. M., and Ski, C. F. (2017).     influence stress responses? Integrating permissive, suppressive, stimulatory and
   Mindfulness mediates the physiological markers of stress: systematic review preparative actions. Endocr. Rev. 21, 55–89. doi: 10.1210/er.21.1.55
   and meta-analysis. J. Psychiatr. Res. 95, 156–178. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2017. Sasaki, K., and Maruyama, R. (2014). Consciously controlled breathing decreases
   08.004                                                                  the high-frequency component of heart rate variability by inhibiting
Pavlov, V. A., and Tracey, K. J. (2015). Neural circuitry and immunity. Immunol. cardiac parasympathetic nerve activity. Tohoku J. Exp. Med. 233, 155–163.
   Res. 63, 38–57. doi: 10.1007/s12026-015-8718-1                          doi: 10.1620/tjem.233.155
Peng, C. K., Henry, I. C., Mietus, J. E., Hausdorff, J. M., Khalsa, G., Benson, H., et al. Schel, M. A., Windhorst, D. A., van der Molen, M. W., and Crone, E. A.
   (2004). Heart rate dynamics during three forms of meditation. Int. J. Cardiol. (2013). Developmental change in intentional action and inhibition: a heart rate
   95, 19–27. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2003.02.006                            analysis. Psychophysiology 50, 812–819. doi: 10.1111/psyp.12065
Penttilä, J., Helminen, A., Jartti, T., Kuusela, T., Huikuri, H. V., Tulppo, M. P., et al. Schmalzl, L., Powers, C., and Henje Blom, E. (2015). Neurophysiological and
   (2001). Time domain, geometrical and frequency domain analysis of cardiac neurocognitive mechanisms underlying the effects of yoga-based practices:
   vagal outflow: effects of various respiratory patterns. Clin. Physiol. 21, 365–376. towards a comprehensive theoretical framework. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 9:235.
   doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2281.2001.00337.x                                   doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2015.00235
Perciavalle, V., Blandini, M., Fecarotta, P., Buscemi, A., Di Corrado, D., Bertolo, L., Schroeder, E. B., Liao, D., Chambless, L. E., Prineas, R. J., Evans, G. W., and
   et al. (2017). The role of deep breathing on stress. Neurol. Sci. 38, 451–458. Heiss, G. (2003). Hypertension, blood pressure, and heart rate variability:
   doi: 10.1007/s10072-016-2790-8                                          the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Hypertension 42,
Phongsuphap, S., Pongsupap, Y., Chandanamattha, P., and Lursinsap, C. (2008). 1106–1111. doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000100444.71069.73
   Changes in heart rate variability during concentration meditation. Int. Secher, N. H., and Amann, M. (2012). Human   investigations into the
   J. Cardiol. 130, 481–484. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2007.06.103             exercise pressor reflex. Exp. Physiol. 97, 59–69. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.2011.
Popov, S. V., Afanasiev, S. A., Kurlov, I. O., and Pisklova, A. V. (2013). Drug-free 057679
   correction of the tone of the autonomic nervous system in the management of Seitz, A., and Watanabe, T. (2005). A unified model for perceptual learning. Trends
   cardiac arrhythmia in coronary artery disease. Int. J. Biomed. 3, 74–77. Cogn. Sci. 9, 329–334. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2005.05.010
Porges, S. W. (1992). Vagal tone: a physiological marker of stress vulnerability. Sevcencu, C., Nielsen, T. N., Kjærgaard, B., and Struijk, J. J. (2018). A
   Pediatrics 90, 498–504.                                                 respiratory marker derived from left vagus nerve signals recorded with


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org                 22                                    October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                                            Breathing in Contemplative Practice


   implantable cuff electrodes. Neuromodulation 21, 269–275. doi: 10.1111/ner. meditative states described in yoga texts. J. Altern. Complement. Med. 19,
   12630                                                                   35–42. doi: 10.1089/acm.2011.0282
Sgoifo, A., Carnevali, L., Pico Alfonso, M. L., and Amore, M. (2015). Autonomic Ter Horst, G. J., and Postema, F. (1997). Forebrain parasympathetic control of
   dysfunction and heart rate variability in depression. Stress 18, 343–352. heart activity: retrograde transneuronal viral labeling in rats. Am. J. Physiol.
   doi: 10.3109/10253890.2015.1045868                                      273, H2926–H2930. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.1997.273.6.h2926
Shapiro, S. L., Walsh, R., and Britton, W. B. (2003). An analysis of recent Thayer, J. F. (2007). What the heart says to the brain (and vice versa) and
   meditation research and suggestions for future directions. Hum. Psychol. 31, why we should listen. Psychol. Top. 16, 241–250. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2012.
   86–114. doi: 10.1080/08873267.2003.9986927                              02.004
Shiozawa, P., Silva, M. E., Carvalho, T. C., Cordeiro, Q., Brunoni, A. R., and Thayer, J. F., Ahs, F., Fredrikson, M., Sollers, J. J. III., and Wager, T. D. (2012). A
   Fregni, F. (2014). Transcutaneous vagus and trigeminal nerve stimulation meta-analysis of heart rate variability and neuroimaging studies: implications
   for neuropsychiatric disorders: a systematic review. Arq. Neuropsiquiatr. 72, for heart rate variability as a marker of stress and health. Neurosci. Biobehav.
   542–547. doi: 10.1590/0004-282x20140061                                 Rev. 36, 747–756. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.11.009
Simons, D. J., Boot, W. R., Charness, N., Gathercole, S. E., Chabris, C. F., Thayer, J. F., and Fischer, J. E. (2009). Heart rate variability, overnight
   Hambrick, D. Z., et al. (2016). Do ‘‘brain-training’’ programs work? Psychol. urinary norepinephrine and C-reactive protein: evidence for the cholinergic
   Sci. Public Interest 17, 103–186. doi: 10.1177/1529100616661983         anti-inflammatory pathway in healthy human adults. J. Intern. Med. 265,
Slagter, H. A., Davidson, R. J., and Lutz, A. (2011). Mental training as a tool in the 439–447. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2008.02023.x
   neuroscientific study of brain and cognitive plasticity. Front. Hum. Neurosci. Thayer, J. F., Hansen, A. L., Saus-Rose, E., and Johnsen, B. H. (2009). Heart
   5:17. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2011.00017                                     rate variability, prefrontal neural function and cognitive performance: the
Smith, P. J., Blumenthal, J. A., Hoffman, B. M., Strauman, T. A., Welsh-bohmer, K., neurovisceral integration perspective on self-regulation, adaptation and health.
   Jeffrey, N., et al. (2011). Aerobic exercise and neurocognitive performance: Ann. Behav. Med. 37, 141–153. doi: 10.1007/s12160-009-9101-z
   a meta- analytic review of randomized controlled trials. Psychosom. Med. 72, Thayer, J. F., and Lane, R. D. (2000). A model of neurovisceral integration
   239–252. doi: 10.1097/psy.0b013e3181d14633                              in emotion regulation and dysregulation. J. Affect. Disord. 61, 201–216.
Smith, R., Thayer, J. F., Khalsa, S. S., and Lane, R. D. (2017). The hierarchical doi: 10.1016/s0165-0327(00)00338-4
   basis of neurovisceral integration. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 75, 274–296. Thayer, J. F., Loerbroks, A., and Sternberg, E. M. (2011). Inflammation and
   doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.02.003                                    cardiorespiratory control: the role of the vagus nerve. Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol.
Song, H. S., and Lehrer, P. M. (2003). The effects of specific respiratory rates on 178, 387–394. doi: 10.1016/j.resp.2011.05.016
   heart rate and heart rate variability. Appl. Psychophysiol. Biofeedback 28, 13–23. Thayer, J. F., and Sternberg, E. M. (2010). Neural aspects of immunomodulation:
   doi: 10.1023/A:1022312815649                                            focus on the vagus nerve. Brain Behav. Immun. 24, 1223–1228. doi: 10.1016/j.
Sperduti, M., Martinelli, P., and Piolino, P. (2012). A neurocognitive model of bbi.2010.07.247
   meditation based on activation likelihood estimation (ALE) meta-analysis. Thayer, J. F., Yamamoto, S. S., and Brosschot, J. F. (2010). The relationship of
   Conscious. Cogn. 21, 269–276. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2011.09.019         autonomic imbalance, heart rate variability and cardiovascular disease risk
Steenbergen, L., Sellaro, R., Stock, A. K., Verkuil, B., Beste, C., and Colzato, L. S. factors. Int. J. Cardiol. 141, 122–131. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2009.09.543
   (2015). Transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation (tVNS) enhances response Tracey, K. J. (2002). The inflammatory reflex. Nature 420, 853–859.
   selection during action cascading processes. Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 25, doi: 10.1038/nature01321
   773–778. doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2015.03.015                        Tracey, K. J. (2007). Physiology and  immunology   of the  cholinergic
Steyn, E., Mohamed, Z., and Husselman, C. (2013). Non-invasive vagus nerve antiinflammatory pathway. J. Clin. Invest. 117, 289–296. doi: 10.1172/jci30555
   stimulation for the treatment of acute asthma exacerbations—results from an Tu, Y., Fang, J., Cao, J., Wang, Z., Park, J., Jorgenson, K., et al. (2018). A distinct
   initial case series. Int. J. Emerg. Med. 6:7. doi: 10.1186/1865-1380-6-7 biomarker of continuous transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation treatment in
Studzinski, R. (2009). Reading To Live: The Evolving Practice of Lectio Divina. major depressive disorder. Brain Stimul. 11, 501–508. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2018.
   Collegeville: Liturgical Press.                                         01.006
Taha, B. H., Simon, P. M., Dempsey, J. A., Skatrud, J. B., and Iber, C. Tully, P. J., Cosh, S. M., and Baune, B. T. (2013). A review of the affects of worry
   (1995). Respiratory sinus arrhythmia in humans: an obligatory role for vagal and generalized anxiety disorder upon cardiovascular health and coronary
   feedback from the lungs. J. Appl. Physiol. 78, 638–645. doi: 10.1152/jappl.1995. heart disease. Psychol. Health Med. 18, 627–644. doi: 10.1080/13548506.2012.
   78.2.638                                                                749355
Tang, Y., Hölzel, B. K., and Posner, M. I. (2015). The neuroscience of mindfulness Tzeng, Y. C., Sin, P. Y. W., Lucas, S. J. E., and Ainslie, P. N. (2009). Respiratory
   meditation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 16, 312–312. doi: 10.1038/nrn3916       modulation of cardiovagal baroreflex sensitivity. J. Appl. Physiol. 107, 718–724.
Tang, Y. Y., Lu, Q., Geng, X., Stein, E. A., Yang, Y., and Posner, M. I. (2010). doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00548.2009
   Short-term meditation induces white matter changes in the anterior cingulate. Umetani, K., Singer, D. H., McCraty, R., and Atkinson, M. (1998). Twenty-four
   Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 107, 15649–15652. doi: 10.1073/pnas.10110  hour time domain heart rate variability and heart rate: relations to age and
   43107                                                                   gender over nine decades. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 31, 593–601. doi: 10.1016/s0735-
Tang, Y.-Y., Ma, Y., Fan, Y., Feng, H., Wang, J., Feng, S., et al. (2009). Central 1097(97)00554-8
   and autonomic nervous system interaction is altered by short-term meditation. Undem, B. J., and Carr, M. J. (2001). Pharmacology of airway afferent nerve
   Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 106, 8865–8870. doi: 10.1073/pnas.09040    activity. Respir. Res. 2, 234–244. doi: 10.1186/rr62
   31106                                                                Vago, D. R., and Silbersweig, D. A. (2012). Self-awareness, self-regulation
Tavares, B. S., de Paula Vidigal, G., Garner, D. M., Raimundo, R. D., de abreu, L. C., and self-transcendence (S-ART): a framework for understanding the
   and Valenti, V. E. (2017). Effects of guided breath exercise on complex neurobiological mechanisms of mindfulness. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 6:296.
   behaviour of heart rate dynamics. Clin. Physiol. Funct. Imaging 37, 622–629. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00296
   doi: 10.1111/cpf.12347                                               van der Molen, M. W. (2000). Developmental changes in inhibitory processing:
Taylor, J. A., Myers, C. W., Halliwill, J. R., Seidel, H., and Eckberg, D. L. (2001). evidence from psychophysiological measures. Biol. Psychol. 54, 207–239.
   Sympathetic restraint of respiratory sinus arrhythmia: implications for vagal- doi: 10.1016/s0301-0511(00)00057-0
   cardiac tone assessment in humans. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 280, Van Diest, I., Verstappen, K., Aubert, A. E., Widjaja, D., Vansteenwegen, D.,
   H2804–H2814. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.2001.280.6.h2804                     and  Vlemincx, E. (2014). Inhalation/exhalation ratio modulates the
Taylor-Piliae, R. E., and Froelicher, E. S. (2004). The effectiveness of Tai Chi effect of slow breathing on heart rate variability and relaxation. Appl.
   exercise in improving aerobic capacity: a meta-analysis. J. Cardiovasc. Nurs. 19, Psychophysiol. Biofeedback 39, 171–180. doi: 10.1007/s10484-014-
   48–57. doi: 10.1097/00005082-200401000-00009                            9253-x
Telles, S., Raghavendra, B. R., Naveen, K. V., Manjunath, N. K., Kumar, S., Van Laere, K., Vonck, K., Boon, P., Versijpt, J., and Dierckx, R. (2002). Perfusion
   and Subramanya, P. (2013). Changes in autonomic variables following two SPECT changes after acute and chronic vagus nerve stimulation in relation


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org                 23                                    October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                                            Breathing in Contemplative Practice


   to prestimulus condition and long-term clinical efficacy. J. Nucl. Med. 43, cortical network with the medial temporal lobe memory system. Hum. Brain
   733–744.                                                                Mapp. 35, 1061–1073. doi: 10.1002/hbm.22234
van Vugt, M. K., and Slagter, H. A. (2014). Control over experience? Magnitude of Wayne, P. M., and Kaptchuk, T. J. (2008). Challenges inherent to Tai Chi
   the attentional blink depends on meditative state. Conscious. Cogn. 23, 32–39. research: part I—Tai Chi as a complex multicomponent intervention. J. Altern.
   doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2013.11.001                                       Complement. Med. 14, 95–102. doi: 10.1089/acm.2007.7170A
Vaschillo, E., Lehrer, P., Rishe, N., and Konstantinov, M. (2002). Heart Wayne, P. M., Walsh, J. N., Taylor-Piliae, R. E., Wells, R. E., Papp, K. V.,
   rate variability biofeedback as a method for assessing baroreflex function: Donovan, N. J., et al. (2014). Effect of Tai Chi on cognitive performance in
   a preliminary study of resonance in the cardiovascular system. Appl.    older adults: systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 62, 25–39.
   Psychophysiol. Biofeedback 27, 1–27. doi: 10.1023/A:1014587304314       doi: 10.1111/jgs.12611
Ventura-Bort, C., Wirkner, J., Genheimer, H., Wendt, J., Hamm, A. O., and Weber, C. S., Thayer, J. F., Rudat, M., Wirtz, P. H., Zimmermann-Viehoff, F.,
   Weymar, M. (2018). Effects of transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation (tVNS) Thomas, A., et al. (2010). Low vagal tone is associated with impaired post
   on the P300 and alpha-amylase level: a pilot study. Front. Hum. Neurosci. stress recovery of cardiovascular, endocrine and immune markers. Eur. J. Appl.
   12:202. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00202                                   Physiol. 109, 201–211. doi: 10.1007/s00421-009-1341-x
Voelcker-Rehage, C., and Niemann, C. (2013). Structural and functional  Wei, G.-X., Xu, T., Fan, F. M., Dong, H. M., Jiang, L. L., Li, H. J., et al. (2013).
   brain changes related to different types of physical activity across the life Can Taichi reshape the brain? A brain morphometry study. PLoS One 8:e1038.
   span. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 37, 2268–2295. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2013. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061038
   01.028                                                               Wendt, J., Neubert, J., Koenig, J., Thayer, J. F., and Hamm, A. O. (2015).
Vonck, K., Raedt, R., Naulaerts, J., De Vogelaere, F., Thiery, E., Van Roost, D., Resting heart rate variability is associated with inhibition of conditioned fear.
   et al. (2014). Vagus nerve stimulation. . .25 years later! What do we know about Psychophysiology 52, 1161–1166. doi: 10.1111/psyp.12456
   the effects on cognition? Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 45, 63–71. doi: 10.1016/j. Williams, D. P., Thayer, J. F., and Koenig, J. (2016). Resting cardiac vagal tone
   neubiorev.2014.05.005                                                   predicts intraindividual reaction time variability during an attention task
Voss, M. W., Vivar, C., Kramer, A. F., and Van Praag, H. (2013). Bridging animal in a sample of young and healthy adults. Psychophysiology 53, 1843–1851.
   and human models of exercise-induced brain plasticity. Trends Cogn. Sci. 17, doi: 10.1111/psyp.12739
   525–544. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2013.08.001                             Wong, C. N., Chaddock-Heyman, L., Voss, M. W., Burzynska, A. Z., Basak, C.,
Wager, T. D., van Ast, V. A., Hughes, B. L., Davidson, M. L., Lindquist, M. A., and Erickson, K. I., et al. (2015). Brain activation during dual-task processing
   Ochsner, K. N. (2009a). Brain mediators of cardiovascular responses to social is associated with cardiorespiratory fitness and performance in older adults.
   threat, Part II: prefrontal-subcortical pathways and relationship with anxiety. Front. Aging Neurosci. 7:154. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2015.00154
   Neuroimage 47, 836–851. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.05.044        Wood, R., Maraj, B., Lee, C. M., and Reyes, R. (2002). Short-term heart rate
Wager, T. D., Waugh, C. E., Lindquist, M., Noll, D. C., Fredrickson, B. L., and variability during a cognitive challenge in young and older adults. Age Ageing
   Taylor, S. F. (2009b). Brain mediators of cardiovascular responses to social 31, 131–135. doi: 10.1093/ageing/31.2.131
   threat. Part I: reciprocal dorsal and ventral sub-regions of the medial prefrontal Wu, S.-D., and Lo, P.-C. (2008). Inward-attention meditation increases
   cortex and heart-rate reactivity. Neuroimage 47, 821–835. doi: 10.1016/j. parasympathetic activity: a study based on heart rate variability. Biomed. Res.
   neuroimage.2009.05.043                                                  29, 245–250. doi: 10.2220/biomedres.29.245
Wahbeh, H., Elsas, S. M., and Oken, B. S. (2008). Mind-body interventions: Wu, Y., Wang, Y., Burgess, E. O., and Wu, J. (2013). The effects of Tai Chi exercise
   applications in neurology. Neurology 70, 2321–2328. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl. on cognitive function in older adults: a meta-analysis. J. Sport Health Sci. 2,
   0000314667.16386.5e                                                     193–203. doi: 10.1016/j.jshs.2013.09.001
Walton, K. G., Schneider, R. H., and Nidich, S. (2004). Review of controlled Xue, S., Tang, Y.-Y., and Posner, M. I. (2011). Short-term meditation increases
   research on the transcendental meditation program and cardiovascular    network efficiency of the anterior cingulate cortex. Neuroreport 22, 570–574.
   disease. Risk factors, morbidity and mortality. Cardiol. Rev. 12, 262–266. doi: 10.1097/wnr.0b013e328348c750
   doi: 10.1097/01.crd.0000113021.96119.78                              Yerkes, R. M., and Dodson, J. D. (1908). The relation of strength of stimulus
Wang, C., Bannuru, R., Ramel, J., Kupelnick, B., Scott, T., and Schmid, C. H. to rapidity of habit-formation. J. Comp. Neurol. Psychol. 18, 459–482.
   (2010a). Tai Chi on psychological well-being: systematic review and meta- doi: 10.1002/cne.920180503
   analysis. BMC Complement. Altern. Med.  10:23. doi: 10.1186/1472-68  Yin, S., Zhu, X., Li, R., Niu, Y., Wang, B., Zheng, Z., et al. (2014). Intervention-
   82-10-23                                                                induced enhancement in intrinsic brain activity in healthy older adults. Sci. Rep.
Wang, S.-Z., Li, S., Xu, X.-Y., Lin, G.-P., Shao, L., Zhao, Y., et al. (2010b). Effect 4:7309. doi: 10.1038/srep07309
   of slow abdominal breathing combined with biofeedback on blood pressure Ylikoski, J., Lehtimäki, J., Pirvola, U., Mäkitie, A., Aarnisalo, A., Hyvärinen, P.,
   and heart rate variability in prehypertension. J. Altern. Complement Med. 16, et al. (2017). Non-invasive vagus nerve stimulation reduces sympathetic
   1039–1045. doi: 10.10.1089/acm.2009.0577                                preponderance in patients with tinnitus. Acta Otolaryngol. 137, 426–431.
Wang, F., Lee, E. K., Wu, T., Benson, H., Fricchione, G. F., Wang, W., et al. doi: 10.1080/00016489.2016.1269197
   (2013). The effects of tai chi on depression, anxiety and psychological well- Yuan, H., and Silberstein, S. D. (2016a). Vagus nerve and vagus nerve stimulation,
   being: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int. J. Behav. Med. 21, 605–617. a comprehensive review: Part I. Headache 56, 71–78. doi: 10.1111/head.12647
   doi: 10.1007/s12529-013-9351-9                                       Yuan, H., and Silberstein, S. D. (2016b). Vagus nerve and vagus nerve stimulation,
Wang, X., Thayer, J. F., Treiber, F., and Snieder, H. (2005). Ethnic differences and a comprehensive review: Part II. Headache 56, 259–266. doi: 10.1111/head.
   heritability of heart rate variability in African- and European American youth. 12650
   Am. J. Cardiol. 96, 1166–1172. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2005.06.050    Yuan, H., and Silberstein, S. D. (2016c). Vagus nerve and vagus nerve stimulation,
Wang, Z., Yu, L., Huang, B., Wang, S., Liao, K., Saren, G., et al. (2015). Low-level a comprehensive review: Part III. Headache 56, 479–490. doi: 10.1111/head.
   transcutaneous electrical stimulation of the auricular branch of vagus nerve 12649
   ameliorates left ventricular remodeling and dysfunction by downregulation of Zahn, D., Adams, J., Krohn, J., Wenzel, M., Mann, C. G., Gomille, L. K., et al.
   matrix metalloproteinase 9 and transforming growth factor β1. J. Cardiovasc. (2016). Heart rate variability and self-control—A meta-analysis. Biol. Psychol.
   Pharmacol. 65, 342–348. doi: 10.1097/fjc.0000000000000201               115, 9–26. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2015.12.007
Wang, Z., Yu, L., Wang, S., Huang, B., Liao, K., Saren, G., et al. (2014). Chronic Zeidan, F., Johnson, S. K., Diamond, B. J., David, Z., and Goolkasian, P. (2010).
   intermittent low-level transcutaneous electrical stimulation of auricular Mindfulness meditation improves cognition: evidence of brief mental training.
   branch of vagus nerve improves left ventricular remodeling in conscious Conscious. Cogn. 19, 597–605. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2010.03.014
   dogs with healed myocardial infarction. Circ. Heart Fail. 7, 1014–1021. Zelazo, P. D., Craik, F. I. M., and Booth, L. (2004). Executive function across the
   doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.114.001564                                life span. Acta Psychol. 115, 167–183. doi: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2003.12.005
Ward, A. M., Schultz, A. P., Huijbers, W., Van Dijk, K. R. A., Hedden, T., and Zhang, S., Hu, S., Chao, H. H., Ide, J. S., Luo, X., Farr, O. M., et al. (2014).
   Sperling, R. A. (2014). The parahippocampal gyrus links the default-mode Ventromedial prefrontal cortex and the regulation of physiological


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org                 24                                    October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
Gerritsen and Band                                                                                            Breathing in Contemplative Practice


   arousal. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 9, 900–908. doi: 10.1093/scan/ Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
   nst064                                                               conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
Zheng, G., Liu, F., Li, S., Huang, M., Tao, J., and Chen, L. (2015). Tai Chi and be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
   the protection of cognitive ability: a systematic review of prospective studies
   in healthy adults. Am. J. Prev. Med. 49, 89–97. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2015. Copyright © 2018 Gerritsen and Band. This is an open-access article distributed
   01.002                                                               under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
Zhou, X., Zhou, L., Wang, S., Yu, L., Wang, Z., Huang, B., et al. (2016). The use of distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
   noninvasive vagal nerve stimulation to inhibit sympathetically induced sinus author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication
   node acceleration: a potential therapeutic approach for inappropriate sinus in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
   tachycardia. J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol. 27, 217–223. doi: 10.1111/jce.12859 distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.


Frontiers in Human Neuroscience| www.frontiersin.org                 25                                    October 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 397
