
ABSTRACT

This thesis examines how comic art has been influential to the art world, society,
and other entertainment medias, such as television and film. Unfortunately, scholars and
art historians have not recognized comic art as gallery-worthy, an influencer o f societal
change, or as one o f the most traditional and adaptable art forms. An analysis o f many
comic artists and their work identifies the importance o f comic art as a sequential,
political, and social language.

1

CHAPTER 1

THE COMICS PLACE IN ART CULTURE

Since the days o f classic artists, societies have embraced artists and their work.
This has allowed tradition and creativity to flourish and carry on. Many art movements
since have left their legacies in art books and museums. At last, however, one art
movement has successfully integrated the traditional with the new, continuing to be a
leading creative force in the art world —comic book art. Some art enthusiasts contend
comic book art is lowbrow or not gallery worthy because it does not exhibit traditional art
elements, such as historical relevance, methodological skill, formal components, and
monetary value. These arguments fail to consider the impact comic book art has had on
society and the art world. By dissecting comic art with the art methodologies and
principles o f art in mind, which is how traditional art is analyzed, we will find they are
equal. Firstly, by discussing comic book art as a sequential art form, we can conclude it
is a language and to be considered a major driving force within the art and humanities
world. Vernon Hyde M inor’s Art H istory’s History maintains, “The humanities not only
study discrete works o f art and literature, but also concern themselves with process: how
one reads, looks at, understands, and enjoys art” (4).
Comic book art should be regarded as the modem day sequential art form. After
all, they share the same meaning. Both stem from the idea o f letters and images as a train
o f images. The word comic is even defined as a “group o f cartoons in a narrative
sequence” (“Comic” 144). Furthermore, we can date sequential art back to the beginning

o f civilization. For example, Egyptian hieroglyphics, rose windows displaying biblical
scenes, the Sistine chapel fresco, tombs, etc., have used art as a tool to record history.1
Scott McCloud’s Understanding Comics maintains that, “Reading from left to right we
see the events o f the conquest, in deliberate chronological order unfold before our very
eyes” (13). Comic art, as a root o f sequential art, has played a vital role in the art world.
We as a society just did not realize the extent o f its societal influence until later.
Caricatures are also a vital component in comic art, and could be credited to
Leonardo Da Vinci in the early 1500s. For example, Study o f Five Grotesque Heads (Da
Vinci) captured the caricature portrayal that comic art has grown into. The painting
personifies five men with exaggerated facial features. More important, however, instead
of trying to achieve beauty and realism, Da Vinci embraced the idea that art could expose
human flaws or character traits in a way that was self-deprecating, emotional, political,
and cultural. James Gillray carried on Da Vinci’s idea to fuse caricatures with comic art
and became one o f the greatest caricature artists in the eighteenth century. His works o f
art were especially seen as politically offensive. For example, The Plumb-pudding in
danger; or State epicures taking un petite souper (Gillray) showcases Napoleon and the
British Prime Minister William Pitt carving up the world. As if that is not enough satire
for one, Pitt’s slice is considerably larger than Napoleon’s. Comic art was emerging as a
popular art medium because o f artists like Gillray and Da Vinci. In addition, what is so
special about comic art is its ability to adapt and morph into different genres, while
maintaining the same form as traditional art. For instance, Thomas Rowlandson proved
caricatures within comic art did not need to be political in order to be successful. His

3

other works o f art titled Discomforts o f an Epicure and Why D o n ’t You Come to Bed, You
Drunken Sot further proved comic art could be aimed humorously at oneself and the
social world.
With the rise in fame from caricature works o f art, newspapers in the nineteenth
century published comic strips that dealt with social history and the complexities o f
individual experience. A comic’s combination o f self-deprecated humor, words, social
and political relevance, and pictures changed the way art was seen.2 It had now become a
global yet intimate experience. Although illustrating a story from one point o f view can
be biased, comic book artists still have to follow the traditional skill set that any classical
artist is trained in. These foundations are presented within the methodologies o f art and
Heinrich W olfflin’s principles o f art, 1915.
Art methodology and W olfflin’s principles o f art include all the elements o f style
within a work of art. Laurie Adams maintains the main methodologies used in art
analysis are: formalism, iconography, Marxism, feminism, biography, semiology, and
psychoanalysis (XVI). Each methodology demonstrates that if art can be broken down
into these categories, it not only represents a traditional foundation, but also has a social,
intellectual, and moral impact on society. Furthermore, Wolfflin believed there is a
methodical and scientific understanding o f art. His laws have to do with opposing
principles, such as linear vs. painterly, plane vs. recession, open vs. closed form,
multiplicity vs. unity, and absolute vs. relative clarity (Minor 109-124).3 If one could
analyze and identify comic book art with each methodology and W olfflin’s principles in
mind, why would it not be considered a traditional art form, and therefore part o f the elite

art gallery league? By examining Art Spiegelman’s book Maus, comic art will be
identified as methodological. Additionally, a discussion on how Spiegelman successfully
illustrated Wofflin’s opposing principles within Maus and his other book, In the Shadow
o f No Towers, will conclude that comic book artists use the same fundamental techniques
as traditional artists.
Spiegelman’s Maus is a comic book about how his father, Vladek Spiegelman,
survived the Holocaust. It showcases comic art as formalistic because Spiegelman
emphasized elements such as sharp lines, shapes, and texture within the book. These
techniques are deceptively simple, presenting in pen and ink Vladek’s emotions for us to
feel. The panels, for example, are comprised o f linear, sharp black and white lines that
fill up the entire space within the panel. These sharp lines simulate a fast rhythm to
invoke movement and tension, allowing the viewer to relate to the experience as a whole.
Alternatively, the iconographical approach concentrates on content as opposed to
form. The content within Maus is addressed within the characters. The story is not so
much about the Holocaust, but about how individuals are portrayed during this tragic
time. Spiegelman purposely drew different races as animals. For instance, he drew the
Jews as mice, the Germans as cats, and the Poles as pigs. By taking away human forms,
we as viewers are not as attached, and therefore the content can be seen more clearly.
The methodologies o f Marxism and feminism can be seen within Maus, capturing
art’s political and economic changes within class, gender, and society. Minor states,
“Understanding art as a social phenomenon is not meant just to enrich our perspectives;
Marxists claim to show the true form o f interpretation” (148). Spiegelman did just that.

He illustrated a time (Germany, 1933) when dominance and bigotry were fueled by
racism and mass propaganda. The political anti-Semitism from Hitler and the Nazis
singled out the Jew as a threat to the established order o f society. Within the book he
also interplayed the past and the present to capture how class, gender, and society have
changed from one generation to the other.
Since the Renaissance, there has been a plethora o f biographical genres.
Historians have studied Da Vinci’s art and scientific research, Michelangelo’s art,
Vincent Van Gogh’s self-portraits, Ludwig van Beethoven’s music and letters, Giorgio
Vasari’s biographies, film documentaries, etc. With all these technological
advancements, it appears society has come a long way. However, the biographical
approach to artists still remains traditional, since it works in relation to the artist’s life and
personality. Thus, Spiegelman’s Maus couldn’t be more qualified to be a part o f this
methodology. He should be considered a rich source for illustrating impactful events o f
the past and present that have caused psychological burdens. In The Shadow o f No
Towers is also a didactic, ‘warts and all’ story, as told from Spiegleman’s direct
experience living in New York when the terrorist attacks o f September 11, 2001,
occurred. His purpose behind illustrating these two books seems to be an affinity with
reliving history. By recording names and stories from his own experiences and primary
sources, he hopes to ensure, just as Da Vinci or Van Gogh, that the memories o f their
accounts are preserved.
Semiotics maintains that cultural expressions, such as language, art, music, and
film, are composed o f signs. Additionally, each sign has meaning beyond its literal self.

6

According to Will Eisner, “The human form and the language o f its bodily movements
become one o f the essential ingredients o f comic strip art” (Comics and Sequential Art
103). Present day, there is no other art form more semiotic than comic book art because
everything is symbolic and true to its original identity.4 Spiegelman, for example
illustrates the Nazi symbol throughout Maus. The swastika is important because it is a
visual sign that most people immediately attach Hitler’s name to. Long before Hitler,
however, swastikas were used in ancient civilizations around the world, and the symbol
“remains widely used in Indian Religions, primarily as a sacred symbol o f good luck”
(“Swastika”). Thus, images can look identical, but represent very different meanings.
Semiotics forces the artist and viewer to think about representation. Comic art must,
therefore, clearly show which meaning is used, or the communication between artist and
reader is lost. It also symbolizes the paradox comic art entails. For instance, comic book
art embodies a yin-yang flow, as the interaction o f two energies (good vs. evil) cannot
exist without each other. Semiotics plays a significant role in the history o f art because
everything around us is an image with a meaning or interpretation attached to it.
Therefore, in regards to comic art, signs and symbols need to be clearly illustrated in
order for the reader to interpret them accurately.
Psychoanalysis examines the artist’s unconscious development in regards to his or
her art. Sigmund Freud believed that biographers choose their subjects either because o f
hero worship or unresolved issues surrounding their relationship. Minor maintains it is
when “the author may try to dethrone or unmask his or her subject, to show him or her to
be a fraud” (198). This is indicative o f Maus because Spiegelman addresses in the

7

beginning how he had not seen his father in a long time, they were not close, and how he
wanted to find out more about his mother’s life before she died in the holocaust (11).
Unfortunately, the end follows with heightened tension as Spiegelman walks away from
his father’s house angry, along with the word “murderer” captioned above (Maus 159).
What one can always agree on is that art is an extension o f how an artist is internally
feeling at that time. It also derives from an impulse to create and release. Therefore,
psychoanalysis allows one to explore all options o f an artist’s creativity.
Since art methodology explores the methods used in art analysis, each component
is an effective tool for analyzing art. Alternatively, the art methodologies used to analyze
art differs greatly from W olfflin’s scientific methodological approach.
W olfflin’s principles are based upon opposing paired concepts. He believed
“there are two basic ways o f seeing things or o f presenting thing seen” (Minor 111). By
examining his principles within Spiegelman’s Maus (see fig. 1) and In The Shadow o f No
Towers (see fig. 2), we will be able to further conclude how comic book art uses the same
traditional skills as classic art.
10

Wolfflin’s first principle is linearly vs. painterly.5 In Maus, one can identify the
structure o f the illustrations as linearly, but In The Shadow o f No Towers, the painterly
form predominates. Maus, for example, has sharp black and white lines that are
compacted into small panels. They are an important trail for the eye to follow because
each panel moves like a book-- from left to right. Alternatively, In The Shadow o f No
Towers reflects the opposite where the painterly approach dominates. Spiegelman
strategically used painterly form in order to address the abundance o f volume and color
on the page.
Wolfflin’s second paired concept analyzes the illusion o f space within a painting.
Minor maintains, “line tends to adhere to planes, to show itself most explicitly when
extending left or right, up or down” (113). Spiegelman’s Maus reflects a closed space.
Each page is arranged in planes and broken down into panels, like most comic book
layouts. The boxed look leads the viewer’s eye from left to right, feeling twodimensional. Alternatively, he illustrated In The Shadow o f No Towers recessively. He
illustrated a large boat with smoke and other smaller boats extending o ff the page,
creating a continuous movement. In addition, the smoke directs our eye toward the
vanishing point off the page, also creating a three-dimensional feel.
Wolfflin’s open vs. closed form is very apparent within each book. Maus
maintains a closed form. The walls are flat and since the images are inside each panel,
the overall look is box-like with sharp comers. In The Shadows o f No Towers is
strikingly different, maintaining an open form. Just illustrating the ocean gives a feeling

11

o f vastness because it is a large body o f mass. Additionally, the receding smoke and
waves further exaggerate an open sense o f space.
W olfflin’s multiplicity vs. unity methodology hones in on the details within a
work o f art. Maus maintains a multiplicity role, where each plane is independent from
each other. Although the book is a continuous read, each panel is separated in order to
showcase all the different actions, arcs, and flow within the story. In The Shadow o f No
Towers, however, is seen as a whole. Even though Spiegelman drew everyone on the
boat reacting similarly to the same tragic event, they are scattered across the entire page,
not contrived in any assembly. Therefore, there is not one particular person as a focal
point, and the viewer’s eye sees the picture as a whole.
Wolfflin’s absolute vs. relative clarity examines the matter o f clarity in each work
o f art. Maus demonstrates the principle o f absolute clarity. For instance, each panel is
drawn with precise lines, making everything appear physically solid and heavy. On the
other hand, In The Shadow o f No Towers is relative because the picture appears
emotional and physically scattered. Spiegelman also captured the idea of fear and the
unknown within the picture. He drew the boats and skyline extending off the page to
create the effect o f looking incomplete and elusive. Also, by incorporating witty signs,
such as “city o f Podunk” on the main boat, the reality o f the scene feels lost and identifies
with a more relative form.
W olfflin’s principles provide insight into the formal and technical side o f art.
Nevertheless, many question how critiquing art can be done so systematically considering
how different one painting is from the other. The wide acceptance o f Wolfflin, especially

in American Universities, concludes that art can be dissected into these principles. In
addition, many believe Wolfflin’s objectives are very democratic. “He offers us the
dream o f a value-free, culturally biased, objective, more-or-less scientific, a political
access to works o f art” (Minor 124). From W olfflin’s principles, we can identify the
technical skill that goes into any work o f art, especially comic book art.
Alternatively, one problem still exists. Comic book artists are rarely mentioned in
contemporary art history books. The irony about art is it is usually not widely accepted
until the mass audience is ready to “approve” it. Vincent Van Gogh, for example, is
famous for being an expressionistic painter, but only sold one painting when he was
alive.6 Yet, art history books continue to romanticize his name, and his expressionistic
works o f art are now considered one o f a kind. Nevertheless, highly celebrated art
movements have come and gone, comic art has continued to thrive and evolve, yet still
needs to be proven to be gallery-worthy.
•

•

•

Pop art helped provide the next step in making comic book art gallery-worthy.

^

Although comic book art has already been established as sequential and thus pre-Pop art,
Pop art came around when museums were overjoyed with art the mass culture could
identify with. Pop artists, such as Roy Lichtenstein adopted and borrowed comic
characters and images freely. As a result, comic book art was considered a modem art
form.
Roy Lichtenstein was one o f the most infamous Pop artists to paint comic art on
canvas. Robert Hughes maintains, “His best-known source was American comic strips o f
the forties and fifties- the visual fodder that artists o f his generation, who made the Pop

13

movement, grew up on” (351). Lichtenstein’s work accentuates the relationship between
dots, colors, contours, and the thickness o f lines that comic book art entails. Whaam!
(Lichtenstein) is considered one o f the earliest known examples o f Pop art. Yet more
importantly, it was based on Jerry Grandenetti’s comic cover, All-American Men o f War
#89 (“Jerry Grandenetti”). Lichtenstein’s paintings were heavily influenced by comic
strips, and as a result o f his popularity, museums were more accepting o f bringing the
style o f comic book art into their world. Alternatively, many comic book artists still to
this day do not agree with Pop artists using comics’ iconography. During the 1960s,
when Pop art was at its prime, comic artists were still treated as outcasts. They suddenly
saw Pop artists getting critical acclaim for the characters and images that they had
originally created. In addition to their work being plagiarized, Pop art was selling for
thousands o f dollars when comic art was still considered “low” art; which at that time
meant it was garbage. Spiegelman has been very outspoken about the difference between
comic art and Pop art. He was reported stating, “The truth is that the whole early era o f
Pop art was built on the notion o f comic books as junk, not art. It had more to do with
the way that Marcel Duchamp saw urinals” (qtd. in D ’arcy). Alternatively, the Pop art
movement, albeit through media attention, did break comic book art into the museum
world. Thus, helping to show that comic art could survive in two ways simultaneouslyliving underground stealthily and by living in museums.
In “Beyond High & Low: How Comics & Museums Learned to Co □exist,” Kim
Munson discusses the importance o f The Comic Art Show in 1983. It was the first
museum exhibition to show that comic art and fine art were equal. John Carlin and

14

Sheilia W agstaff from the Whitney Museum o f Fine Art curated it. Their aim was to
incorporate the Modernists, the Pop artists, and the comic artists in one gallery setting.
However, the tension between the Pop artists and comic artists was high. In an effort to
diffuse the conflict between them, Carlin addressed it within his goal for the exhibition:
The focus is on the visual style o f the comics in terms o f their formal
development and the influence o f their structure and characters on
contemporary paintings... The work o f the major comic j strip artists
throughout the twentieth century is presented in this exhibition not only as
source material for the sanctified representations o f fine art but as a vital
and uncompromised art form in itself. (Munson)
The comics’ place within art culture should be considered as highly ranked as any
other traditional art movement. The iconography and storytelling methods used, along
with their ability to reach a mass audience, makes comics one o f the most dominant
visual mediums. They have continued to establish a new iconography o f characters,
symbols, and images through the form o f sequential art that no other art movement has
approached. In addition, by discussing how comic book art can be broken down into
W olfflin’s principles, as well as analyzed by each art methodology, it can now be seen as
gallery-worthy. Furthermore, since comic artists have now been proven to be as
skillfully qualified as any other artist, we can further conclude comic book art is just as
successful as traditional art.

15

CHAPTER 2

COMIC BOOK COVERS

From the past to the present, comic book covers have been a major influence on
comic book art. When we look back to see how comic book art has evolved into the
digital age, we find one fundamental responsibility for the cover artist still remains the
same —covers need to be compelling designs that have an immediate wow factor. More
important, the cover makes you want to buy the book. They also need to clearly illustrate
the overall idea o f the entire series. Therefore, the design, composition, color, and
subject matter must be read as a total visual. Although, the ultimate test for a cover
artist’s success is not whether he or she is able to mix all o f these components together.
Comic books are a business and need to be created, distributed, and sold to paying
customers. Therefore, a cover artist must bridge a connection between his or her work of
art, and their audience. Stan Lee stated, “Covers that command the reader’s attention are
critical to the success o f any comic book.. .A great cover interests you, intrigues you, and
makes you want to pick up the book, buy it, and read it” (Stan L e e ’s How to Draw 198).
In this chapter, there will be a discussion o f the evolution o f comic book covers, while
examining some of the most political comic covers, focusing mainly on the Golden Age
o f Comics. Additionally, there will be a compare and contrast analysis on past and
present covers to show how artists have evolved to meet the expectations within today’s
digital age. To conclude, there will be a discussion on how comic books covers continue
to gross a significant amount o f money.

16

During the Golden Age o f Comics, from the 1930s to 1950s, comic book covers
were specifically designed to attract people into buying comic books. Artists and
publishers incorporated hidden forms o f propaganda—where if people bought them, they
were not just buying the story, they were buying the artist and the iconography behind
what a superhero stands for. Comic books were also a hot commodity for many reasons.
They were cheap, light, portable, and told tales o f good triumphing over evil by
illustrating the superhero intimidating, or battling their adversary. The theatrical action
performed by a superhero was a consumer paradise. The stories were exciting, and the
artwork was original and imaginative. They also promoted literacy by making reading
fun. Artists who were known for their cover art, such as Jack Kirby, Captain America;
Bob Kane, Batman; and Joseph Shuster, Superman, birthed many superheroes the world
has formed an emotional attachment to. Thanks to their covers that attracted sales, comic
books became an important and dominant medium in art and literature.
Mark Seifert, a writer for bleedingcool.com, followed the coverage of a lawsuit
o

filed by Jack Kirby’s family, otherwise known as Kirby vs. Marvel.

,

A summarized

account o f the lawsuit reported that on September 16, 2009, two weeks after Disney
announced they would be buying Marvel for four billion dollars, Kirby’s family filed a
suit to end the copyrights for the forty-five characters Kirby created before January 1,
1978. Stan Lee was a key player within this case, and gave a deposition. There were
many questions Lee answered, but two questions pertaining to comic book covers were
asked. The first question asked if he (Lee) had any interest in comic book covers. Stan
Lee replied:

Oh, that was my specialty. The covers in those days were the most
important things. Because we didn’t have fans the way we do now. Today,
fans go to a bookstore, Did the latest Fantastic Four come in yet? In those
days we sold according to how attractive a book looked on the newsstand.
A kid would walk in the newsstand, and whatever caught his eye he’d pick
up. So we made sure-- and this was something that my publisher Martin
Goodman, he was an expert in. He taught me a lot about what to do to a
cover to make it stand out, what kind o f color schemes to use, and so forth.
So I paid a lot o f attention to covers. They were very important.
(Seifert, “Stan Lee”)

During the Golden Age o f Comics, there were not as many comic artists as today.
Therefore, there was more work available. This also reflects why comic book artists
were gaining notoriety and each cover looked similar. The second question Lee was
asked pertained to what Kirby’s job responsibilities were. Lee stated, “Well, to draw the
strip as well and as excited- excitingly and grippingly as possible, and draw it in such a
way that the readers would want to see more, more, more” (Seifert, “Stan Lee”).

World War II helped to change the history o f how superheroes on covers were
illustrated. Around 1940, when Hitler was taking over Europe, artists were very aware o f
what the Nazis’ intentions were, as examined in Michael Chabon’s Pulitzer Prize winning
novel, The Amazing Adventures o f Kavalier & Clay (Chabon). Comic books were
thriving off superheroes with superpowers. For example, Superman used his powers o f

18

X-Ray vision, ability to emit heat from his eyes, freeze objects with superhuman breath,
take flight, etc., to maintain justice in the battle o f good vs. evil. The war, however,
influenced comic artists to create more ‘human’ superheroes for many purposes. Firstly,
the mass audience could better relate and connect to a human hero, as opposed to
someone bom on a different planet. Also, artists could put their own political spin on the
war with the hero they created. This new flock o f superheroes, such as Batman and Iron
Man, did not possess any superpowers, but they were still able to capture enemies by
making use o f intellect, science, technology, wealth, fearlessness, ego, and brute strength.
Jack Kirby and Stan Lee’s Captain America is another example. The superhero was the
alter ego o f Steve Rogers. “Steve” was a feeble young man who was injected with
human perfection serum in order to help the United States war effort. As a result, he is
now considered the “perfect” soldier, wearing a costume that bears the American flag,
and is armed with an indestructible shield.

Jack Kirby’s cover for Captain America Comics #1 could be considered one o f
the most politically influential superhero covers. It shows Captain America punching the
Nazi leader, Adolf Hitler, in the jaw. Each scene is drawn exaggerated, like an over­
acted performance on stage, so that it will be unforgettable in the viewer’s mind. This
cover also influenced the political layers that cover art began to interweave. For the artist,
the superhero became an intentionally patriotic creation, where he or she appeared to take
on the artists’ tones in reference to their opinion towards the war and or the enemy. Jack
Kirby, for example, was bom Jacob Kurtzberg. His parents, Rose and Benjamin
Kurtzberg, were Austrian Jewish immigrants (“Jack Kirby”). Bradford Wright, author o f

19

Comic Book Nation: The Transformation o f Youth discussed why Captain America
Comic writer, Joe Simon and illustrator, Kirby created him. He stated:

Captain America was a consciously political creation; he and Kirby were
morally repulsed by the actions o f Nazi Germany in the years leading up
to the United States' involvement in World War II and felt war was
inevitable: "The opponents to the war were all quite well organized. We
wanted to have our say too.” (36)

For the audience, superheroes, regardless if they had a superpower, played on the notion
o f a reluctant superhero. If they were forced by accident or bom into this super position,
they were still determined to do good for society. In regards to the war, superheroes
became a hopeful sign that no matter what, anyone could capture the enemy. Cover
artists were now highly regarded, and as Lee pointed out, “By the end o f 1941, more than
fifty million people a month- were reading comics” (Stan L e e ’s How to Draw 16).
Artists were getting paid to create covers that bridged the political and fantastical drift.
This was a perfect cocktail because comics were giving Americans a sense o f hope in the
future, as well as an escape to lose themselves in a fantasy world. Additionally, because
covers at that time were concurrent with war, the same central idea ran throughout each
issu e- that a man, like Captain America, could prevail over wartime enemies. Due to the
immense popularity o f the war theme, comic book companies, such as Marvel Comics,
DC Comics, EC Comics, and Charlton Comics, began to produce war titles with combat
covers in an effort to increase sales and bring a different genre into the comic market.

20

The war had a significant influence on American comic book artists, as reflected
in all the war-themed titles and covers. Each title and cover began concentrating on the
United States military involvement in World War I and II, Korean War, Pearl Harbor,
and the Vietnam War, in an effort to feature war-themed characters and stories. These
war titles included Robert Kanigher’s Our Army at War, Harvey Kurtzman’s Frontline
Combat, and the almighty Charlton Comics exhausting all the military branches. For
example, Santangelo created Charlton war titles called The Fightin’Air Force, Fightin ’
Army, Fightin ’ Marines, and the Fightin ’ Navy. War comics introduced the effects o f
war on men and women in an effort to highlight the “real” superheroes. However, even
though war comics catered to the mass audience, they took a dark turn. Covers turned
from American superheroes capturing the enemy to the average soldier dying for his
country. For example, Curt Swan’s cover o f The Star Spangled War Stories #3
exemplifies how war comics depicted the reality o f war. The cover shows a plane down
on enemy lines. The pilot is running to a soldier in his unit who is barricaded in a ditch
with guns. As the enemy approaches, the soldier hands a rifle to the pilot and says,
“Okay, Fly-Boy, now you’re gonna find out how it feels to be in the infantry!” (Swan).
War comics painted a dark perspective and began to lose their niche. The Essential
Guide To World Comics examines the global history o f comics. The authors state, “With
the end o f WWII in 1945, there was no need for these new ‘super’ heroes, and by the end
of the 1940s the public had largely turned their backs on them” (Brooks and Pilcher 27).
Comic books, after all, are a business and need to move on in order to make money.
Since war comics were on the outskirts, new comic book genres were on their way in.

An interview with Will Eisner in The Comics Journal asked him if he felt his business
judgment was a necessary tool to have in order to create art in comics. Eisner stated, “I
got into the comic-book business very early, and I think I was the first to sort o f massproduce comic magazines. I was running a shop in which we made comic-book features
pretty much the way Ford turned out cars” (Eisner, “Interview”).9 Comic book covers
acted as vehicles to sell and produce a body o f work; however, the most popular and
influential covers continue to be from the Golden Age o f Comics.
Comic book covers have evolved and adapted from the Golden Age o f Comics to
the digital age. One similarity that remains is that regardless o f the ‘age,’ they still need
to be visually eye-catching. Alternatively, the difference is what was once a teasing plot
point to sell the story is now computer-generated artwork that showcases the artist’s
unique style.10 Covers are now designed to be more detail oriented with sharper lines,
and maintain a specific “signature” look that introduces a different interpretation to an
old hero. For example, Christopher MacManus, a correspondent for CNETNews
reported on comic book heroes then and now. He created a slide show gallery o f some o f
the most famous comic book covers o f all time, followed by how that superhero has been
recently portrayed in film. He states, “As we progress further into a Digital Age, it's
worthwhile to remember the roots o f those famous Marvel and DC Comics heroes that
sold hundreds o f millions o f comic books” (MacManus). Kirby’s cover art for Captain
America Comics #1 was the first cover MacManus showed, followed by a picture o f how
actor Chris Evans was portrayed as Captain America in the film, Captain America: The
First Avenger. MacManus maintains that today, the iconic superhero looks more

22

polished, with a menacing wartime-era superhero outfit that features more toned down
colors compared to the original outfit. Though he compared print to film, an analysis o f
two comic book covers from the Golden Age and now, Jack Kirby’s Captain America
Comics #1, published in 1941 (see fig. 3) and Steve McNiven’s Captain America #1,
published in 2011 (see fig. 4), concludes that superheroes have always strived to stay
contemporary and are just as cutting edge in the twenty-first century as they were in the
twentieth century.11
Jack Kirby’s cover o f Captain America Comics #1 is action-packed. It maintains
the traditional inking art form, where thick and thin black lines are laid down over pencil
to create the illusion o f depth. The colors are bright, but matte. For example, the Captain
America name is designed in eye catching yellow block letters with black shadowing
underneath. Even though the cover is covered with action, color, and details, Captain
America is one o f the main focal points, showing clear intentions to take down Hitler and
his men. This reflects a story-based event cover because without having to read the book,
it establishes who the main character is, his intentions, and carries the overall concept o f
the series.


25

Alternatively, Steve McNiven’s Captain America #1 cover looks drastically
different than Kirby’s creation. Firstly, digital inking has taken over “traditional” inking.
Through the use o f computer programs, such as Adobe Photoshop and Adobe Illustrator,
as opposed to the pen and brush, digital inking produces the same results, only sharper
and more defined. This clearly shows on the cover, as every line on Captain America is
perfectly fine tuned and shaded. The colors are also brighter hues with a glowing sheen.
Unlike Kirby’s cover, McNiven’s cover is not story driven or overwhelmed with images
or bubbles. Captain America is alone, seemingly flying since there is no ground
underneath him. As a result, this portrays a different approach than what Kirby first
introduced. Like most artists today, this cover is a dynamic design where the acuteness
o f the image is recognizable, but unique in style in order to set it apart from other artists.
Though each cover represents a different era in art history, one being from
traditional form and the other mainly from a computer, they both are visually impacting.
Although, it is arguable the Golden Age o f comics are more politically and socially
driven because almost every cover illustrated a story that specifically honored or reflected
the times. It is also important to address that even though covers in the Golden Age are
considered a dated art form, they will always remain current. Due to the success of
comic books and the cover artists that continuously adapt the superhero to present day,
they will not be forgotten.12 In addition, many o f these covers are considered original
works o f art, and have become collector items.
Original comic book covers from the Golden Age o f Comics are worth a
significant amount o f money. For instance, Heritage Auctions is the world’s third largest

26

auction house, and their annual comic book sales amount to more than seven hundred
million dollars with over six hundred thousand online bidder members. They are also
exclusive auctioneers for many personal collections that have sold for over one million
dollars, such as actor Nicolas Cage, Don Vernon, and Davis Crippen. It was reported that
one o f the biggest sales from Heritage Auctions went to Bob Kane’s cover o f Batman in
Detective Comics #27. The cover sold for over one million dollars in 2010 (Heritage
Comics). Heritage also conducts a Sunday Internet Comics Auction every week,
featuring seventy-five thousand dollars to one hundred thousand dollars worth o f comic
art. Additionally, it is important to address bidders that were priced out on originals still
continue to pay a significant amount o f money for re-creations. For example, John
Romita’s re-created cover o f Amazing Spider-Man #100 sold for seventy-five thousand
dollars (Seifert, “John Romita Sr.”). Thus, it can be concluded that comic book art, like
traditional art, is a popular and high selling art medium.

27

CHAPTER 3

IMAGES AS COMMUNICATIVE TOOLS

In comics, the story is comprised o f images. With an abundance o f images to
choose from, the artist has the opportunity to make a constant stream o f choices regarding
what he or she wants each one to symbolize and communicate. Therefore, the choice o f
the image is what brings the story and characters to life. According to Scott McCloud,
“No matter what style o f image you choose, your pictures first and most important job is
to communicate quickly, clearly, and compellingly with the reader” {Making Comics 26).
The success o f a comic, however, is based on a connection. This is in regards to if the
reader is able to identify and relate to what the image symbolizes. If the image does not
match the character or storyline, then the communication between artist and viewer is
lost. Therefore, the comic artist has a critical job because symbolism and technique is
founded upon the image and what it is trying to say. The wonderful thing about comic art
is that different facial features, expressions, body types, objects, spandex costumes,
symbols, and anthropomorphic animals help readers maintain a visual reminder o f who is
who. They also establish the character’s personality traits and are evidence o f the real
people we see around us. McCloud also states:
The stances and expressions o f characters —even when silent and in the
background - can give readers a wealth o f information about their
emotions and attitudes. A minor detail in the art can foreshadow major
developments in a story. An abstract, expressionistic or symbolic image

28

can strengthen the recounting o f an intensely felt emotion. The ultimate
test o f clarity in comic’s artwork is in how well it delivers in the basic
intent o f each panel. (Making Comics 28-29)
When we discuss images in comics that are successful communicative tools, for instance
stereotypes, symbols, and animals, we can further see why comic art is an influential art
medium.
Stereotypical images should be considered one o f the main ingredients in comic
book art. Even though the word ‘stereotype’ presents a negative connotation, being
synonymous with typecast, label, pigeonhole, etc., it is an effective communicative tool
in comic art. Stereotypes are also used as a foundation to tap into the reader’s primitive
and immediate reactions. Will Eisner discuses how images are categorized into repeated
symbols. He explains that comic images are drawn upon social experience and need to
be identifiable so the mass audience accepts them. He states:
Comic book art deals with recognizable reproductions o f human conduct.
Its drawings are a mirror reflection, and depend on the reader’s stored
memory of experience to visualize an idea or process quickly. This makes
necessary the simplification o f images into repeatable symbols. Ergo,
stereotypes. {Graphic Storytelling 11)
McCloud also discusses why stereotyping is an effective comic art tool. He maintains
that people can easily be categorized and type-casted by their occupation and standard
characteristics, such as beauty, heroism, evil, and humor {Making Comics 13). This
makes it easy for comic artists and readers to identify characters quickly.

The Adventures o f Unemployed Man is a great example o f stereotyping characters
and making them relevant to present day. The book is a satirical look at politics in the
United States, utilizing a parody o f classic superheroes from the Golden Age to present
day. It also illustrates how important a name and costume is to the success o f any
character. For instance, in this work each character is richly illustrated and named to
represent everyday people that have been judged and affected by economic and political
factors. This can be seen in characters such as, Unemployed Man, a man fired from his
job and replaced with his own clone; Wonder Mother, a working mother fired after she
wanted to breastfeed her baby at work, and now lives in her jet that is made out o f the
glass ceiling from her previous boss’s office; Master O f Degrees, a Master’s degree
graduate, but cannot pay off his student loans since no one will hire him because he is
considered over-qualified; Fantasma, an immigrant house cleaner that cannot become a
legal United States citizen; and Plan B, a silver-haired fox that cannot get a job because
no employer wants to pay for his health care. These “real” superheroes are all fighting
against The Hand, The Boot, Pink Slip, Downsizer, Outsourcer, and The Human
Resource, otherwise known as the Just Us League and The Firing Squad (Origen and
Golan).
In comic art, regardless o f what the image symbolizes, it can be easily identified if
it is relatable. This is indicative in The Adventures o f Unemployed Man. Each
“superhero” is modem while keeping traditional ties. For example, Wonder Mother was
drawn as the Golden Age o f Comics Wonder Woman. The authors Origen and Golan,
however, modernized her with a baby strapped to her chest and milk bottles holstered on

her thighs in place o f guns. Each superhero within the book, such as Wonder Mother,
works with the basic and logical idea that superhero names and costumes are relevant,
memorable, and instantly identifiable. Furthermore, if Origen and Golan’s superheroes
help to capture the attention o f millions, it is because they are recognizable as one o f us,
and they exemplify history and the world we live in. CNN interviewed Origen and Golan
to talk more in depth about The Adventures o f Unemployed Man. They stated:
We chose a superhero story —with everyday heroes fighting against
economic super villains —because it was, amazingly, not that far from the
truth... We wanted to take the many invisible economic forces we fight
every day and make them visible by dressing them up in capes, masks and
spandex underwear. We've created an accessible visual vocabulary that
lets us all name, confront and defeat these sinister forces.
(Origen, “Interview”)

Symbols and objects have become the foundation from which comics have been
built upon. Both are great communicative tools because they represent what Origen and
Golan referred to as “visual vocabulary.” Thus, they are universal and do not need words
to explain their relevance or meaning. For example, everyone grows up knowing the
universal ‘no’ symbol is a circle with a diagonal line running through it or a red octagon
represents a stop sign. However, symbols and objects also imply different actions and
outcomes, which is why comic artists must choose wisely which image they want to use
to communicate quickly and clearly. For instance, a butter knife and a combat knife
instantly imply two different meanings and outcomes. Comics employ recognizable

31

objects like these as a shortcut to communicate quickly. They also help assist in
identifying the characters’ strengths, weaknesses, location, preferred activities, whether
they are heroes or villains, etc.
Other than using objects and symbols that are already effective communicators,
comic artists have created their own objects that have become symbolically universal, for
example kryptonite and light sabers. Although, when these ‘fictional’ objects were just
conceived, how would the audience know why they are important or what they
symbolize? We can assume that majority o f people know kryptonite is Superman’s main
weakness. Contact with or even proximity to it can cause Superman to have paralysis or
worse—death. We can also assume from the popularity o f the film, Star Wars, that
majority of people know a light saber is a weapon that requires great skill to use, such as
the Force.13 Yet, how would one know the symbolism and magnitude o f these fictional
objects if they did not read the storyline? When objects are used over and over, while
conveying the same message or action, they become a part o f the language within comics.
Consequently, the power o f an image as a communicative tool allows us to visually
understand its meaning and symbolism. Brian Boyd’s “Art and Evolution: Spiegelman’s
The Narrative Corpse” suggests that images are a form o f cognitive play and directly
correlates to pattern recognition (27-57). In some cases, comic book objects can even
become a part o f the English language, such as kryptonite. It is now defined in the
dictionary as “any surviving fragment o f the exploded mythological planet Krypton,
home o f Superman” (“kryptonite”). Comic artists may have invented symbols that are
birthed with a merchandising team, but they have also taken what is already a

32

recognizable symbol, such as a bat and a shield and made them a part o f American
culture.
Signs and symbols play a vital role in comic art. Yet, the art o f using both to
create a narrative dialogue is not typical in most art mediums today. The comic artist
must be able to marry both o f them, especially when creating superheroes. The
dictionary defines one definition for a sign as a “symbol” (“Sign” 669). It also defines a
symbol as “something that stands for something else, especially something concrete that
represents or suggests another thing that cannot in itself be pictured” (“Symbol” 725). If
the dictionary believes a sign is another word for symbol then they must have similar
qualities. Other similarities include that they are man-made, and are vehicles for
transferring information and or communicating ideas without the use o f words. They also
both indicate a meaning or convey an idea, regardless o f who or what it is intended for.
Alternatively, the difference between a sign and symbol can be thought o f as objective vs.
subjective. A sign is universally sound and has reasoning behind it, such as a bat sign at
a zoo. Thus, it is objective because it is primarily based on facts. A symbol has more
subjective reasoning because it has a higher association with the image itself. It conveys
a social, cultural, or independent feeling that someone has attached to it. When a comic
artist marries the two, they create a powerful symbol that identifies with important
messages. For example, when Bob Kane drew a bat sign on Batman’s chest, the sign
became something greater than just the image on paper, or as a nocturnal mammal. It
represents a man as a creature o f the night, to inflict fear in his enemies, and as a distress
signal. Another example is Captain America’s shield. It is indicative o f the United

33

States o f America’s flag, and symbolizes a man fighting for his country. Both examples
also represent that anyone could be Captain America or Batman, making the symbols
even more impactful. Even though signs and symbols are different, together they are
seen as timeless and represent an immortality that is fitting for a superhero to personify.
In comics, animal-based images are a powerful communicative tool to portray
mankind. They embody emotion, survival instincts, symbolism, instinctive impulses, and
human characteristics. Unlike animals, mankind creates for visual expression, as seen in
gardens, the Earthworks movement, Stonehenge, etc. Animals create as well, but not to
be aesthetically pleasing. They create for instinct and survival. Consequently, since
animals capitalize on purpose and methodology, drawing them in place o f people is a
great way to build anthropomorphic character development and action faster. Eisner
believes that comic artists have little room to build character development. By depicting
characters as animals, it speeds up the story flow, and the reader accepts the character and
his or her actions more readily. He maintains:
Perhaps in the early experience with animal life, people learned which
facial configurations and postures were either threatening or friendly. It
was important for survival to recognize instantly which animal was
dangerous. There is evidence o f this in the successful readability o f
animal-based images, which comics commonly employ when seeking to
evoke character recognition. (Graphic Storytelling 14)
Animals in comics are considered anthropomorphic. They take on personality
traits, emotions, talk in ‘our’ language, wear clothes, etc. Despite the heaviest o f subject

matters (Spiegelman’s M a u s- the Holocaust) or the lightest (Mickey M ouse),14
illustrating animals can take a deceptively informative angle. For instance, the audience
understands the impact o f the story while still maintaining a detachment from the
material that is intended to describe “us.” Anthropomorphic animals are usually
portrayed as mankind, disguised as non-threatening images in order to relay comedy,
tragedy, political opinions, biographies, historical events, news, etc. Maus is a great
example because as previously discussed, Spiegelman purposely drew the Jews as mice,
Nazis as cats, Poles as pigs, and Americans as dogs. According to Spiegelman, he chose
these animals in an attempt to realistically portray people at that tim e.15 He further stated
that Maus is about metaphors that are meant to self-destruct, in order to get people talking
about history and social realities (Spiegelman, “Interview”).
Other famous examples o f anthropomorphic animals include Tom and Jerry ( Tom
and Jerry),16 James Swinnerton’s “Little Bears,” Gary Larson’s Far Side, Robert
Crumb’s Fritz The Cat, and Walt Kelly’s “POGO,” Tom and Jerry is about comical
chases and one of the most popular cartoons for being silly and light-hearted.
Interestingly, it also has many similarities with Spiegelman’s Maus. They both have a cat
and mouse as their main characters, representing a never-ending rivalry o f predator vs.
prey. More important, they both include schemes that often involved violence.
Swinnerton’s “Little Bears” is another example. It has been reported that Swinnerton’s
main job was to illustrate the news. Initially he drew a bear to show the daily weather
report, and people responded amusingly. His bear cartoons expanded out and began
appearing in different stories throughout the paper. The bear is believed to be the first

ongoing and featured comic character in a newspaper (“Biographies”). Larson’s The Far
Side focuses on animals, such as bears, cows, and dogs. The humor is often seen as
controversial because it is based on awkward, uncomfortable social situations that are
seen from an animal’s perspective. Crumb’s Fritz The Cat was a comic about an
anthropomorphic sex-crazed feline cat that explored taboo subjects, such as drugs, sex,
racism, and even incest during the 1960s. For example, in one story, Fritz comes home
after being away for a long time, and has a consensual sexual encounter with his sister
(Crumb, Joe Blow). In regards to illustrating animals, Crumb stated:
I can express something [with animals] that is different from what I put
into my work about humans... I can put more nonsense, more satire and
fantasy into the animals...they're also easier to do than people... With
people I try more for realism, which is probably why I'm generally better
with animals. (“Fritz the Cat, Wikipedia”)
Lastly, Kelly’s creation o f a wildcat named, Simple J. Malarkey in the comic strip
“POGO,” has been considered one o f the most famous political moves within comics. In
one comic strip, Kelly created “an obvious caricature o f Senator Joseph McCarthy. This
showed significant courage on Kelly’s part, considering the influence the politician
wielded at the time and the possibility o f scaring away subscribing newspapers”
(“POGO”). Kelly was told to never draw “Malarkey” again, but he drew him again as a
red hen with a bag over his head. To add to the political discourse, the bag also
resembled a KKK hood. Kelly decided to draw Malarkey one more time. This time his
face was covered by speech balloons, and he was on a soapbox speaking to people that

36

were uninterested. When Kelly received letters asking why he drew him, his response
was most fitting. He replied, “They identified him, I didn’t” (“POGO”).
The aforementioned anthropomorphic comics have presented controversial issues,
such as the Holocaust, violence, news, politics, sex, drugs, etc., in a non-threatening way.
Thus, animals present an opportunity for objectivity. A story with animal characters can
accurately educate emotion and behavior in a way that does not instill fear in readers. In
addition, when pinpointing and examining the faults o f the human race, an animal that is
illustrated anthropomorphically appears in a more amusing light. Animal-based images
are an effective communicative tool revealing that ‘reality’ can be more acceptable when
a mouse or chubby bear relays the information. Ultimately, when the reader is removed
from examining the flaws within social and human behavior, subject matter ranging from
Spiegelman’s Maus to Smokey the Bear is more accepted and retained.
In conclusion, sequential images are successful communicative tools with great
significance. They give the readers a wealth o f information about the character.
Although, if the image does not match the character’s personality, storyline, or is
unrelatable to the audience, then the connection between the reader and artist is lost.
Therefore, it is important to choose the right image. After all, images are the foundation
of comic book art. They help address controversial issues quickly and less threateningly
when illustrated with humor, spandex, and animals.

37

CHAPTER4

COMICS PROMOTING SOCIAL CHANGE

Throughout the decades, comic books have influenced social change with the
concept o f the superhero. In the 1930s, Superman and Captain America did for comics
what Lou Gehrig and Babe Ruth did for baseball. They were the dominant figures that
brought in revenue, hope, escapism, entertainment, and pride. Therefore, it is no wonder
that superheroes have had an increased appeal during times o f real world conflict.
Natalie Rosinsky’s Graphic Content! The Culture o f Comic Books investigates how
comic book creators got inspirations for their superheroes. For instance, she explores
how and why Jerry Siegel created Superman. Siegel had stated that in the 1930s, after
listening to and reading about the genocide o f helpless Jews in Nazi Germany, he
thought, “How could I help them ...? Superman was the answer” (17).
Even before ‘superheroes’ were bom, comic strips mirrored and influenced
society. For example, Richard E. O utcaulf s “The Yellow Kid” inspired a new conscious
thought on how comic strips could establish themselves as art, politics, and a part of
American society. The strip ran every Sunday, demonstrating that a comic character
could be popular as well as profitable. Outcault was groundbreaking because he was the
first comic creator to show the real social problems that exist within class and race. His
attempt to un-furrow the public’s brow with a conscious look at American prejudices
paved the way for all comics to work social, political, and economic realities into their

38

stories. Furthermore, we can see that in many ways, underneath every superhero is a
different version o f the Yellow Kid.
When the Golden Age o f Comics boomed, comic book artists presented
superheroes both as “super” fantasies and as common people that anyone could relate and
identify with. For instance, readers know that Clark Kent (adopted) is Superman, Bruce
Wayne (lost his parents) is Batman, and Peter Parker (not popular, bullied, and
unconfident) is Spider-Man. As ordinary men, these characters were meant to be
relatable. Yet, when their alter ego is in full superhero throttle, one can see why they are
untouchably cool. Put their “costumes” on and they embody confidence, muscles that
resemble overlapping mountains, mysterious secret identities that only ‘w e’ know,
strength, superpowers, etc. Even as superheroes, however, they are cut from the same
cloth as average people where their morals, views, and experiences are concerned. With
two identities to work with, superheroes brought hope, innovation, and empathy to almost
every demographic. Roy Thomas’s The Alter Ego Collection, Volume One transcribes a
Stan Lee roast in 1995. One o f the speakers, Jim Shooter, spoke o f how innovative
Marvel characters were. He repeated Stan Lee’s standard sound bite he used to say to the
media, “heroes with hang-ups, heroes with problems” (18). Shooter goes on to say, “But
the fact is, it was a lot more than that. It was heroes with lives that we could identify
with. And that was revolutionary” (Thomas 18). When we look back, we will find artists
naturally enlisted superheroes to mirror, expose, and face challenges within social and
cultural discrimination. This will be discussed within the Great Depression, the war
effort (Superman, Captain America), women’s equality (Wonder Woman), Civil Rights

39

movement (Black Panther), Gay Rights (Northstar), Stan Lee’s anti-drug series, and
political activists (underground comics).17
Superman was one o f the first superheroes. He became an instant icon that
changed America in a profound and unexpected way. He took on the role o f a social
activist. His earlier confrontations were with crooked politicians and businessman,
reflecting the influence o f President Roosevelt’s democratic New Deal.

1R

Joe Shuster’s

Superman debut in Action Comics #1 proudly states on the first page that he is “champion
o f the oppressed. The physical marvel o f who had sworn to devote his existence to
helping those in need” (Action Comics#1 1). In addition, Shuster’s cover o f Action
Comics #13, Superman stopping a full train from derailing, and Fred Ray’s cover of
Action Comics #50, Superman holding up a collapsing tunnel so miners could run out,
clearly illustrated him as a strong figure embodying all that was good about being an
American. During a time when America needed a hero, Superman was it.
In March 2009, the Skirball Cultural Center in Los Angeles presented a new
exhibit to celebrate superheroes from the Golden Age o f Comic Books. The exhibit
explored how superheroes rose to the occasion during the Great Depression and WWII by
symbolizing the new hopes and dreams o f the depressed nation.19 Erin Clancy, a curator
for the exhibit stated, "In the 1930s, the American Dream had become a nightmare, and I
think comic books and superheroes in particular provided an escapist form o f
entertainment that allowed the American public to go into a fantasy world where all the
ills o f the world were righted by these larger-than-life heroes" (qtd. in Hyde).
Alternatively, people used superheroes not just as an escape from reality, but also to help

40

enforce, promote, and get the public involved within different social issues. Superheroes
and activists could work together like a marketing team. As a result, fantasy and reality
could co-exist to promote and influence social change. For example, a discussion about
the “team” o f Stetson Kennedy and Superman will show how Superman influenced social
change against the Ku Klux Klan (KKK).
Firstly, Superman was so popular, a radio show called The Adventures o f
Superman took over the airwaves less than two years after Siegel and Shuster debuted
him in 1938. It began airing on February 12, 1940 on eleven stations. By May 1941, it
had expanded to sixty-three stations (“The Adventures o f Superman (radio)”). The radio
program proved to be an important milestone within radio history because it dedicated
copious storylines to addressing the problems o f bigotry within society. A most notable
example was in 1946 when human rights activist Stetson Kennedy enlisted the producers
o f The Adventures o f Superman to help to expose the KKK’s political influence and
rising membership. Kennedy went undercover and spied on the KKK, being able to
provide vital information that no one knew outside the inner circle, such as secret code
words and details o f their rituals. He presented the information to the producers and
writers o f The Adventures o f Superman, and proposed a realistic storyline where
Superman battled the KKK, exposing their most guarded secrets. The producers
approved o f sixteen episodes called “Clan o f the Fiery Cross.” The stories had great
ratings and the result was perceived to have had a negative impact on the KKK’s new
recruits and membership (“The Adventures o f Superman (radio)”). It is clear Superman
influenced society with his widespread popularity and ability to maintain a positive image

as a social activist. In addition, the radio show proved that superheroes were not just a
form o f escapism. They helped influence social change because as the audience listened,
they became actively engaged in their commitment to help.

As previously discussed, Kirby’s cover o f Captain America #1 showed him
punching Hitler. If this is Captain America’s first adventure—depicting him fighting the
Nazi leader and giving America an “envisioned” victory, then Kirby purposely designed
him to be influential and relatable. His “super” name says it all. He represented
America, not just as an individual fighting during WWII, but as a whole. Robert
Weiner’s essay, Captain America and the Struggle o f the Superhero: Critical Essays,
stated, “Captain America comics were not only for children on the home front. Comic
books also were published to be sent to the troops on the lines” (67). He concludes that
sending Captain America comic books to the soldiers overseas was a motivator to build
morale, as well as a symbol o f America for them to remember what they were fighting
for (67). Furthermore, Captain America’s patriotism led to higher comic sales, which
reinforced how influential and valuable comics were, especially at that time.

The effects o f World War II had an extraordinary impact on women in American
society, and o f course in comic books. When men were drafted to the war, labor
shortages increased. As a result, women were offered better paying jobs in the military
and defense factories. William Moulton Marston recognized the need for a woman role
model, especially when they were new to working in a m an’s world. His creation o f
Wonder Woman became revolutionary. Even though it was a man who created her

42

actions, the stories were addressed from a woman’s point o f view. She was the first
woman superhero to show women were just as strong in mind and body as men. She also
fought for the true potential o f women and equality. Thus, she reflected the changing
political situation for women, and helped aide in influencing the rebirth o f the W omen’s
Movement in the 1940s. When Peter G. Harry’s cover o f Wonder Woman Sensation
Comics #1 was printed, she projected a sexy, physically tough, educated, feminist, and
American patriotic look. Roger Sabin’s Comics, Comix & Graphic Novels: A History o f
Comic Art maintains:

In a story from 1943 entitled ‘Battle for Womanhood,’ she uses the lasso
to rescue a woman whose life has been shattered by her scheming
husband. The wife tells Wonder Woman, ‘What can a weak girl do?’ She
replies, ‘Get Strong! Earn your own living-join the WAACs or WAVES
and fight for your country!’ (88)

During a difficult time, Wonder Woman targeted the untapped female demographic,
which only further boosted comic book popularity and sales. Sabin concludes, “This
female riposte to the success o f Superman was designed specifically with girls in mind,
and embodied feminist politics in a way that was unprecedented” (86). Furthermore, as
one o f the first superheroes to be ‘bom ’ discriminated against, Wonder Woman paved the
way for other comics to intermix minorities that addressed social and political concerns.
Siegel and Shuster’s “Lois Lane” comic is one example. Rosinsky maintains, “In a 1970
issue o f Lois Lane comic, Lois borrows alien technology from Superman to become a

43

black woman. She then painfully learns firsthand what it means to be African American
in Metropolis” (42).

Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster’s experiment o f one minority sympathizing with
another was revolutionary. It acted as an educational steppingstone, addressing social
and cultural prejudices in an educational way. From the 1960s on, comic sales and
characters grew rapidly. For the first time, superheroes had more dimension to their
personalities. Artists and writers paid more attention to the person behind the mask than
the super, which created more emotional attachment for the reader. Some popular
examples include, The Fantastic Four, a group o f superheroes that fight with each other
like a regular family, and live in New York as opposed to fictional city like Batman’s
Gotham City; Peter Parker, a nerdy guy that lives in a lower class neighborhood, lost his
parents, and his low confidence inevitably stops him from talking to the ladies; and the
X-Men, a series of outcasts where the intention o f each character was to show that the
world is not tolerable o f being different, and fear is equated with hate.

In 1966, when the Black Panther Party achieved national recognition for its
political involvement in the civil rights movement, Marvel introduced The Black Panther
superhero. He was an African Prince named T ’Challa that lived two different liv es- one
as an American teacher and the other as an African King. Considering the timing, it is no
coincidence Lee created this character. Both believed in speaking out for all minorities
(Lee, Black Panther).

David A. Roach and Gina Renee Misiroglu’s The Superhero Book: The Ultimate

Encyclopedia o f Comic-Book Icons, discuss how the Black Panther reflected the times,
new interest in African American roots, and played an influential role in American
society. They point out that the last two years o f the comic “featured an all black cast,
something that had never been attempted in comics before, and the innovations continued
in a later story, which saw the Panther take on the Ku Klux Klan” (85). Having an
African American superhero fight the KKK (as opposed to Superman) does not make the
issue o f racial discrimination less important or impacting. It just proved comic publishers
and creators had become more fearless with their in-your-face depictions o f social reality.

Another major milestone in comics came from the superhero, Northstar. He was
revolutionary because not only was he the first mainstream homosexual superhero, but
because he was also the first to promote AIDS prevention. He announced he was gay in
the issue o f Alpha Flight #106, where he also adopted a girl with the AIDS virus
(“Northstar Character Biography”). Nevertheless, the issue’s underlying meaning was
not about his coming out. Rather, he was used as a vehicle to increase awareness about
HIV/AIDS. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, AIDS was closely associated with
homosexuality.20 Gregory M. Herek and John P. Capitanio’s “AIDS Stigma and Sexual
Prejudice,” discussed how the initial push towards AIDS research and prevention came
from the gay community. They stated, “The gay community worked to promote an
understanding that HIV infection results from behavior rather than status, with
heterosexual and homosexual behaviors alike carrying potential risks for transmission”
(1). Northstar supported this stance exactly. He did not have AIDS, but his adopted girl
did, educating young people that anyone—young, old, gay, or straight could be infected

with HIV. “The event generated significant publicity in the mainstream press and Alpha
Flight #106 sold out in a week, despite the fact that the series was not a very popular title.
It is the only comic book issue to have been inducted into the Gaylactic Hall o f Fame”
(“Northstar”).21 Northstar is a great example o f how superheroes played a major role in
shaping the attitudes and behavior o f children, teenagers, and adults. In addition, comics
were finally being recognized as influential and educational by credible sources, such as
the U.S Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Alternatively, others such as Dr.
Frederick Wertham and the committee from the Comics Code o f Authority (CCA) did
not agree.
In 1971, the U.S. Department o f Health, Education, and Welfare noticed how
influential superheroes were to the public, particularly to college students. M. Keith
Booker’s Encylopedia o f Comic Books and Graphic Novels, Volume 1 explains, “They
asked Lee to write an anti-drug story; the anti-drug issues #96-98 o f The Amazing SpiderMan were printed without the Seal o f Approval o f the Comics Code, which forbade the
use o f drug-related material in comics” (364).

The story began with Parker’s friend

high on drugs, standing on the edge o f a roof about to jum p off because he thought he
could fly. Spider-Man rescued him from jumping off and brought him to the hospital for
•

further help. The story clearly showed what could happen if you take drugs and are not
in control of your body and mind. Lee sent the issues into the CCA, but they rejected it
because according to the new regulations, comics were not able to mention drugs.
Marvel publisher Martin Goodman published the issues o f the storyline anyway. As a
result, Lee received positive feedback from teachers, religious leaders, and government

46

officials praising him for his effort to educate people about the effects o f drugs.
Additionally, the CCA saw the positive feedback and changed the Code to be more
lenient about what they objected to (Esposito).
The CCA and Dr. Wertham attempted to mark the end o f comic books for
referencing sex, drugs, violence, racism, implied actions, etc., and they mostly succeeded.
However, what they did was make way for the most radical, crude, sexual, political, and
liberating time in comic book history to flourish—underground comics. It was the 1960s
and the hippie movement lucidly danced its way in. Underground comics ranged from
drugs, protests, socialism, women’s movement, civil rights, etc. They broke every rule
that Wertham and the CCA implemented. Even the name, ‘underground’ suggested a
defiant attitude on art and political issues. Spiegelman stated, “Underground comics had
offered something new...unselfconsciously redefining what comics could be, by
smashing formal and stylistic, as well as cultural and political, taboos” (Sabin 118).
Underground comics were never intended to be as mainstream as the Golden or
Silver Age o f comics, but they were just as innovative and influential. The difference
was they were able to represent absolute freedom o f expression because there was no one
to report to. They were self-publishers. This paved the way for new opportunities,
giving minorities, such as women the ability to produce and draw the stories themselves.
According to Sabin, “The writing and drawing had been done almost exclusively by men.
If women were involved at all, they were relegated to back stage roles such as coloring or
lettering” (104). Also, instead o f creating superheroes, underground artists featured
themselves as the main heroes, such as Harvey Pekar, Robert Crumb, and Art

47

Spiegelman.23 “The underground had shown that a comic need not be restricted to any
particular age group, art style or subject matter, and had established a completely new
economic rationale for creators. Both these achievements revolutionized comics,
alternative and, to an extent, mainstream, forever” (Sabin 128). Underground comics
were an American phenomenon that caused a convergence o f influences. For example,
they were parodies on romance, Young Lust (Griffith); formal and stylistic, Spiegleman;
expressionistic, artist S. Clay Wilson;24 horror, Tales From The Crypt (Gaines);
autobiographic, Pekar and Crumb; and feminist, Trina Robbins.25 Additionally,
contemporary American artist Raymond Pettibon was a cult figure among the
underground art and punk-rock music scene in the late 1970s and 1980s. His works o f art
encompasses a variety o f influences, such as underground comics, music, Pop art, Dada,
film noir, books, and television. He is best known for his edgy album-cover comic
drawings for the punk-rock band, Black Flag. Even though Crumb had illustrated many
album covers around the same time, Pettibon should be recognized as marrying
underground comic art with music, and creating a new genre o f comic art within the
music industry.26
Underground comics modernized comic art by making it more modem and
adaptable. They may have been more a jarring art movement, but they had to do with the
world around ‘us’ at that time, which is what the hippie period was all about. This also
further represents why comics have remained influential, and will stay around forever
mirroring, promoting, and influencing social change.

48

CHAPTER 5

BIOGRAPHY AND AUTOBIOGRAPHY

Comic books are highly iconographic. They reflect the artist’s individual choice
as to what message he or she wants their voice and image to convey. Therefore, it is no
wonder that some o f the most successful comics have been created biographically and
autobiographically. Famous comic artists, such as Lee, Siegel, Kirby, Eisner,
Spiegelman, Crumb, and Pekar have revolved their characters, voice, and storyline
around what they knew b e st- themselves. They applied what they knew about personal
tragedy and society into the world o f superheroes and characters. Regardless if these
artists were consciously or unconsciously influenced to record their stories, they changed
the face o f the comic industry.
Siegel, Lee, Eisner, Kirby, and Spiegelman have led similar paths in life and
career. They all grew up during the Depression days, their parents were Jewish
immigrants, and they used art sequentially to tell stories. The demoralizing effect o f the
Depression and WWII spawned many autobiographical comics that each o f them shared
in their own way. For instance, when we breakdown Siegel’s background, we can see
what inspired him to create Superman. Siegel’s father, Mitchell Siegel, was a Jewish
immigrant from Lithuania. He was a business owner in Cleveland, but on June 2, 1932,
he died during a robbery attempt. This would be one year before Siegel and Shuster
created Superman. His death is considered controversial because some believe during the
robbery he was either shot to death or died o f a heart attack. However, when we look

back to when Siegel and Shuster invented America's best-known comic-book hero, it
makes sense why they created a bulletproof hero named Superman. According to David
Colton, a journalist for USA TODAY, Siegel never talked about his father’s death,
resulting in an explosion of questions regarding Superman’s origin. He maintains, “But
now it appears that the origin might have been more profound—that it was the death of
Jerry Siegel's father that pushed the devastated teen to come up with the idea o f a
"Superman" to right all wrongs” (Colton). Furthermore, Colton reported on how there is
strong evidence to support that Siegel created Superman to avenge his father’s death. For
example, after he died, newspapers argued over the need for more police protection
during the rough times o f the Depression. Colton further states, “A letter published in
The (Cleveland) Plain Dealer on June 3, 1932, the day after the robbery, denounces the
need for vigilantes in the harsh days o f the Depression. The letter is signed by an A.L.
Luther” (Colton). Many people believe this was the birth o f Superman’s archenemy, Lex
Luther.
It is evident that Siegel consciously created Superman from personal experience.
The characteristics o f Superman are too closely related to his father for it not to be.
Siegel created Superman as an alien immigrant figure who wanted to fit into American
society just like Siegel’s parents; when Superman is Clark Kent, he is a blue-collar
worker just like his father; Superman fights crime and injustice in a big metropolitan city,
reminiscent of New York where Siegel grew up; and Superman’s archenemies name is
Luther, the name that prevented help from coming when violence was increasing. Barry
Wigmore, a journalist for the Daily M ail also wrote about how Superman was legendary,

50

but bom out o f tragedy. In his report he quoted Gerard Jones, o f who is the author of
Men o f Tomorrow: Geeks, Gangsters and the Birth o f the Comic Book, “There are clear
similarities between Jerry’s early years and the fictional Superman’s flight from the
planet Krypton. Superman’s invulnerability to bullets, loss o f family, destruction o f his
homeland—all seem to overlap with Jerry’s personal experience” (qtd. in Wigmore).
Siegel appeared to be the first to fuse his personal story in with a superhero’s life. It
opened doors for comics to finally be recognized as literary, visual, and educational tools.
Will Eisner was one o f the most successful pioneers o f autobiographical comic
books. He drew upon his personal experiences in many o f his stories to reveal an
intimate self-portrait o f his career:
Eisner first tackled autobiographical topics in his groundbreaking “A
Contract With God” in 1978. In the opening scenes o f the title story, a
weeping Frimme Hersh, in a torrential rain, returns from burying his
young daughter. Eisner publically confessed in 2004 that this premise was
based on the early death o f his only daughter, Alice, a life shattering
experience for him and his wife, Ann. (Kitchen 14)
While Eisner’s Life, In Pictures is one o f his most infamous biographical and
autobiographical comic books,

To The Heart o f the Storm is arguably his most

influential and visibly autobiographical story. The story describes his journey growing
up as a Jew during WWII and the effects that the Holocaust and Great Depression had on
him and others. Eisner states:

When I began to work on this book, I intended to deliver a narrowly
focused fictional experience o f that climate, but in the end, it morphosed
into a thinly disguised autobiography. In such a work, fact and fiction
became blended with selective recall and result in a special reality. I came
to rely on the truthfulness o f visceral memory. (To The Heart 107)28
Eisner’s autobiographical approach modernized comics to a new level. His work
generated truth and rawness that could be understood by any audience anytime and
anywhere. While at that time underground comics were in hot demand, and used as a
vehicle for self-expression, what differentiated Eisner from underground comics was that
he dealt more directly and honestly with the trials and tribulations o f society, humanity,
and himself. He told stories o f real people and true events from his neighborhood that
struggled culturally to be a part o f the American dream. His comics were as long as
novels, and presented a more mature, educated, and literate sequential art. Furthermore,
he broke out o f the standard comic book hero portrayal to present emotionally driven
stories that reflect the heart o f mankind.

With Eisner’s comics titled: Last Day In

Vietnam, Dropsie Avenue: The Neighborhood, The Building, and Family Matter, he
became the godfather o f revolutionizing comics into lengthy, familiar stories that anyone
could relate to. As a result, his comics had become novels, otherwise known as graphic
novels.
By the late 1960s, the war was over and comic book sales o f superheroes were
down. However, thanks to Eisner, comic books were now recognized as graphic novels,
and thus comics had a new niche on the publishing market. They could be sold in

52

bookstores as ‘books’ as well as in comic book stores. Additionally, large publishing
companies were more willing to take on non-superhero comics because they felt the
market was aimed at more adult readers as opposed to children and teenagers. Eisner,
Pekar, and Spiegelman utilized the word “graphic” novel by creating a new subculture of
autobiographical and biographical comic storytelling and ran with it successfully.
Harvey Pekar is infamous for showing that even the most monotonous and
mundane lives (his) is still filled with heroic struggle and self-deprecating humor. Within
all his comics, Pekar demonstrates that the ‘subtle’ drama that exists within all o f us is
more important to address than stuffing unoriginal action packed superheroes down our
throats. His style is autobiographical, writing in the first person with stories that appear
fresh from his mind. Additionally, his art style was to draw ordinary people and places
realistically, but with little detail, in order to convey how simple yet complicated people’s
lives are, namely his. Pekar’s American Splendor, The Life and Times o f Harvey Pekar is
a collection o f stories about his life. “Hypothetical Quandary” is one o f the stories and it
sums up his entire self-image and non-aristocratic behavior. The action takes place
almost entirely in his head, as he weighs the pros and cons o f his mundane work and life
status, while casually walking the streets o f his familiar neighborhood (Pekar). This
comic symbolizes how influential Pekar was to the comic world. He gave comic books a
new direction by making his mundane life commercial and relatable. Superheroes and
action-packed comics had nothing on Harvey Pekar.
Art Spiegelman, as previously discussed, wrote and illustrated the biographic and
autobiographic stories, Maus and In The Shadows o f No Towers. His stories were

53

groundbreaking for comics because he was the first to win the Pulitzer Prize for Maus.
This comic book proved that comics were capable o f being regarded at the highest-level
o f literary and illustrative works o f art. Furthermore, it epitomizes the biographical
approach to art history. As it follows his turbulent relationship with his father, his
father’s experiences surviving the Holocaust, and his mother’s death, Spiegelman
mastered how comics could be seen as visual, literary, and educational. Maus was also
the first autobiographical comic to have been given attention to by Universities and
primary schools. The first edition sold over one hundred and fifty thousand copies and
was translated into eighteen languages (“Art Spielgelman”). Thus, it is undeniable that
on a global scale, Spiegelman is credited with helping comics be taken more seriously as
educational resources.
Biographic and autobiographic comics have been around since the beginning of
civilization. As a sequential art, we are able to see how and when they influenced social
change and modernized art. From traditional artists, such as Michelangelo’s Sistine
Chapel fresco, Diego Velazquez’s Las Meninas, and Vincent Van Gogh’s Self-Portrait, it
was only a matter o f time till comic books came on the scene and opened up different
opportunities to see art.

54

CHAPTER 6

ARTIST’S PLAYING GOD

Throughout art history, artists have depicted, acted, and acknowledged him or herself as
god-like or as an artistic genius. This is especially seen during The Renaissance period
(14th and 15th century), and again in the 20th and 21st century with comic book art.
Artists from the Renaissance period established a new scientific approach to
painting. They studied the principles o f light, dark, and linear perspective so their work
would appear three-dimensional. Paintings within this period, such as Michelangelo’s
Sistine Chapel fresco and Da Vinci’s The Last Supper, are considered two o f the greatest
works of art ever created; and are continuously studied by students and historians.
Furthermore, Michelangelo and Da Vinci were both described as the archetype o f the
Renaissance man—a superhuman with great depth, intelligence, and knowledge o f the
arts and sciences. They paved the way for artists to be personified as divine. It is
important to address this was a word that was only associated with god. Thanks to
Michelangelo and Da Vinci, artists were seen as creators and a direct link from artist to
God, which elevated the status o f artists from low to high. Albrecht Durer’s Self-Portrait
is another example of an artist being seen as God-like (see fig. 5). Many art historians
believe this painting is remarkable because Durer portrayed him self so closely to the
representation of Christ, revealing a religious tone. Firstly, he is posing frontal as
opposed to the three quarter trend o f the time. His hair is long and curly, with warm
tones on his symmetrical face to bring him in the forefront from the

55

dark background. The arrangement o f his right hand is also very symbolic. It is in the
middle o f his chest pointing up, which could be seen as being raised to give a blessing.
The painting is symbolic because it can be seen as a declaration o f Durer’s role as a
creator.

56

After the end o f Renaissance period, so many art and social movements swept
through, that the association o f artist and God, and the trend to paint God with mankind
had diminished—until comic books.

They revived and modernized the idea that the

world needed a divine spirit to flourish again. This notion can be directed towards comic
artists being recognized as renaissance men, creators, and bringing traditional relevance
back into the art world and society. When we dissect a comic artist’s role, they
exemplify the modem day renaissance men. They incorporate science, mathematics,
literature, and art into their works o f art. As previously discussed, a comic artist’s
training is considered traditional and classic, same as in the Renaissance period. For
example, they must be skilled in knowing how to properly execute the foundations o f
illustration—composition, perspective, color theory, and technique. They must also
possess an intuitive sense o f how to create drama through body language. Additionally,
as in the Renaissance era, comics use symbols and signs to communicate. It is well
documented in art history books and films, such as the Da Vinci Code and Heaven on
Earth that there are many signs and symbols represented in Renaissance works o f art.31
Furthermore, the success o f a visual narrative is dependent on the ability to convey space
and time. According to Eisner, “The act o f paneling, or boxing the action, not only
defines its perimeters, it establishes the position o f the reader in relation to the scene and
indicates the duration o f the event” (Comics and Sequential Art 26). Comic art, like
traditional art, also depicts a story so clearly that we could almost follow it without
words. Michelangelo’s Sistine Chapel is one example. It illustrates nine scenes from the
Book of Genesis (New Jerusalem Bible), including The Creation o f Adam

57

(Michelangelo). Within this work o f art, he was able to capture a sequential moment of
time, clarity, history, and emotion.
Robert Crumb also re-created the Book o f Genesis (New Jerusalem Bible) in
comic art form, titled The Book o f Genesis. Crumb maintains he was faithful to the
historical accuracy o f the original and it took him over four years to illustrate. He stated,
“Every word o f the first book o f The Bible is included (and hand lettered)” (“Book and
Collections”). Crumb’s Book o f Genesis reached #1 in the New York Times graphic
novel bestseller list, as well as on the Christian books list on Amazon.com. USA Today
contended it was, “A beautifully drawn and relentlessly faithful rendition o f the first 50
chapters o f the Bible... Crumb has produced what could be the ultimate graphic novel”
(“Book and Collections”). From the 14th century to the 21st century, it can be concluded
comic artists and traditional artists have painted the same story, and were able to convey
time, space, historical relevance, and emotion. Since the job o f a comic artist is to tell a
story as clearly, concisely, and visually as possible, Michelangelo and Crumb did just
that. They used the same traditional principles and methodologies o f art, and modernized
it for their audience. Since Michelangelo was considered a creator, Crumb should be
entitled to carry the name as well. Comic artists, after all, hold great God-like power.
Every superhero and character’s destinies are in the palm o f their hand. Thus, like God,
they have the ability to create, eliminate, and transform people.
Stan Lee is considered one o f the most influential comic book creators. Even as
new trends emerged within comics, he never followed them. He set them. He has
created more superheroes and storylines than any other comic artist. In addition to his

58

successes, Lee is the only comic writer and artist to be the founder, chairman, chief
creative officer, and board of director o f POW! Entertainment.

39

More important,

however, Lee was successful because o f how he chose to portray superheroes. He
brought the idea o f God (strength and hope) and realism back into the hearts and minds o f
everyday people. Thus, Lee provided a solution to people’s inner hero via superhero.
During a time when the Depression and religion manifested itself into a cold war, he
always conveyed the message that the challenge o f a superhero was to use his or her
strength for the greater good. This was an important lesson, especially for military troops
that were struggling to find peace from WWI and WWII. Furthermore, like
Michelangelo’s Sistine Chapel fresco that incorporated fantasy, history, and religion, Lee
revived art as traditional and historical. For instance, when Lee was paid to speak to
different colleges promoting Marvel, he found a constant theme. According to Stan Lee
and George M air’s Excelsior! The Amazing Life o f Stan Lee, “The students never failed
to impress him with their deep knowledge o f Marvel’s characters and their ability to draw
points o f connection between Stan’s works and the tradition o f western art, mythology,
and literature” (184). The string o f superheroes that Lee created, who were directly
linked to the gods, satisfied the inner hero in everyone. This can be seen is Lee’s comic
re-creations of Thor and Hercules.
Lee’s creation o f Thor was based on the Norse god o f thunder, and was a huge
success as a comic book and box office movie. In Norse mythology, Thor was the son o f
Odin, the chief god, and Fjorgyn, Earth. He was considered the strongest o f all the gods.
He is a hammer-wielding god associated with thunder, ill temperament, storms, strength,

59

and protection o f mankind. Larry Lieber’s Journey into Mystery #83 introduced Thor
into the comic world, but it is interesting to find out why Lee decided to bring him in. To
women, Thor is ridiculously handsome and protective. To men, he gets the women, has a
cool hammer, and has the power to create thunder. Lee, on the other hand was looking to
“make someone stronger than the strongest human” (Lee and Mair 157). It is also
important to remember that Thor was a demi-god (part god and part mortal). Lee
consciously made him into a comic book character because o f this reason. He was a god
with human flaws. Thus, Thor was the perfect superhero to bring down to Earth for
anyone to enjoy and feel like a ‘god’ was on Earth to protect them.
Hercules was also a huge asset to the comic book world. Lee wrote his first
appearance into Journey into Mystery #1. The character is based on Heracles o f Greek
mythology, and he was the illegitimate son o f Zeus and Alcmene, who was the wisest and
most beautiful mortal woman. This is another example o f Lee re-creating a demi-god in
the comic world. Thor and Hercules originated in mythology, but in the 21st century, Lee
proved that people continue to love the idea o f gods, superheroes, and vigilante justice.
Thus, Lee repeatedly made successful storylines around superheroes that could be
relatable yet fantastical, modem yet traditional. Furthermore, he understood that people
take comfort knowing “there is a god-like figure going around making the world just”
(Roach and Misiroglu XII).
Lee understood how marketable the artist was to the reader. In 1965, he created
the Marvel Bullpen and the Merry Marvel Marching Society (MMMS). The Marvel
Bullpen was a news and information page that profiled Marvel staff, societal trends, and

60

Stan’s Soapbox.

The MMMS was a successful membership club that cost one dollar.

A new member would receive a membership card, stickers, button, and a letter o f
introduction signed by the bullpen. Both the Bullpen and the MMMS were a way to
establish rapport with fans, and to show the artist was as god-like and cool as the
character he or she created. Even nicknames such as, Stan “the Man” Lee and Jack
“King” Kirby were announced to further make the reader feel a kinship with the artist and
be able to recognize the guy or girl behind the mask. Lee nurtured his Marvel readers
and artists like a father figure. By giving them insight into the bullpen, he was allowing
the artist to build a more grandiose persona outside o f work. In his autobiography, Mair
states, “Stan increased his reputation as something o f a free spirit, acting out action poses
and character descriptions for the staff with exaggerated gestures, jumping on tables, and
leaping across the floor” (Lee and Mair 146). Lee was not only a creator, he wanted to be
one o f his own creations.
Thanks to comics, being able to possess superpowers is something everyone has
pondered. Comic artists modernized the way we, as readers, view art. They brought a
sense o f history and traditionalism o f the Renaissance period into modem day society.
When art felt lost with too many movements going in different directions, comics merged
the old and the new together into one art form. Furthermore, it is important to
acknowledge they have surpassed any other art movement by being able to modernize
and adapt to any art medium. It was only natural for comic art to proceed to the next
largest “art” playing fie ld - bringing it from the page to the screen.

61

CHAPTER 7

BRINGING IT FROM THE PAGE TO THE SCREEN

Comics have always played a key role in the evolution and success o f film. It is
easy to see how adaptable and influential comic books are, because throughout history
the majority o f comic books have been adapted into television shows, animated shows,
and films. Since the Golden Age o f Comics, comics have grown in two different visual
mediums. One is on paper and the other on film. In the 2 1st century, however,
technology raised the bar for what it can visually do to emulate the comic world. As a
result, comic book adaptations have become some o f the highest grossing blockbuster
films. From Total Film, The Modern Guide To Movies, the history o f Marvel was
reviewed:
Over the past 70-odd years, Marvel Entertainment has evolved from that
first issue o f Marvel Comics into one o f the industry’s leaders. Its multi­
billion dollar deal with The Walt Disney Company proves just how
lucrative its characters are to Hollywood. Mouse House CEO Bob Iger
describes Marvel as a “treasure trove” that “transcends gender, age and
geographical barriers. (“Complete History”)
Within this chapter we will find that in the beginning o f comic art and film’s
trajectory, they mirrored each other closely. Moreover, discussing the similarities and
differences will further conclude how comics have directly influenced and inspired the
way film and television have been shot and seen from the 1930s to present day.

Comic art has always been an essential steppingstone for film to flourish as an art
form. Although, in the beginning o f both o f their reigns, history indicates they mirrored
each other closely. For instance, in 1888 Louis Le Prince shot the first film called
Roundhay Garden Scene, and in 1895, Outcault’s “Yellow Kid” was the first to show
comic art as an influential art form.34 These were both silent films. Thus, like comic
books, films used titles throughout the story to narrate arcs and dialogue. Additionally,
the 1930s and 1940s for film has been labeled “The Golden Age o f Hollywood,” and for
comic books, it is called, “The Golden Age o f Comics.” Another commonality between
comics and film is they were forced to be regulated under a code administration in order
to set guidelines regarding sex, violence, and crime.35 Furthermore, in the Golden Age o f
film and comics, primary colors (red, blue, yellow) were the only colors available to print
at the time. Just like comic book artists, filmmakers painted the filmstrips by hand. For
example, Louis Giannetti in Understanding Movies states, “The original version o f The
Birth o f a Nation (1915) was printed on various tinted stocks to suggest different moods:
The_buming o f Atlanta was tinted red, the night scenes blue, the exterior love scenes pale
yellow” (25). As much as comics and film mirrored each other during the Golden Age, it
is important to remember comics will always play the lead role.
Comic artists helped provide a clear model for filmmakers to imitate and follow.
For example, they established characters that have become iconic celebrities, integrated
the traditional elements o f art, and created unlimited storylines that film and television
have copied and pasted. One o f the first comics adapted for film was Happy Hooligan, a
popular comic strip by Frederick Burr Opper. Reminiscent o f “Yellow Kid,” Burr told

63

the adventures o f a smiley hobo who encountered misfortune on account o f his looks.
“The comic was also probably the very first American comic strip adapted for films,
when J. Stuart Blackton directed six live-action shorts (1900-1902). Some 15 years later,
it was adapted for more than 50 animated cartoons” (“Happy”). Comic artists were first
to integrate the formal elements o f art into comic art. This includes illustrating panels,
angles, voice, cinematic continuity, time, acting, action, movement, perspective, and
color. When we discuss Giannetti’s Understanding Movies and what he believes to be
are the key elements in filmmaking, we can see how filmmakers have taken on the same
formula that comic artists created.
Like comic art, Giannetti maintains that filmmakers use the same formal elements
for film. These include, shots, angles, light and dark, color, lenses, filters, stocks, special
effects, frame, composition and design, territorial space, movement, and open and closed
forms (11-95). Many o f these elements are categorized under the mise en scene,
otherwise known as how the visual elements are staged, framed, and photographed within
the scene. Most important, however, before shooting filmmakers apply these elements
the same way comic artists do, they storyboard. A layout to a comic artist is the same as
a storyboard to a cinematographer and director. They are still shots that are drawn inside
frames for the purpose o f determining how to visually see and tell the story.
Alternatively, some argue storyboards differ from comic books because they do not have
dialogue; however, the end result is the same, which is to frame a scene within a panel.
Giannetti adds further insight to how comic artists and filmmakers apply the same
techniques:

64

Hitchcock provided individual frame drawings for most o f the shots in his
films, a technique called storyboarding. His cinematographers framed up
according to Hitchcock’s precise sketches. Hence, when Hitchcock
claimed he never looked through the viewfinder, he meant that he assumed
his cinematographer had followed instructions. (42)36
Although comic art and film appear similar, they also differ in many ways.
Physically, it is easy to see the difference. One is on paper and the other is projected on a
big screen. Additionally, budget is a huge defining factor, but that is rather obvious. The
heart o f the difference between comic art and film is time, as opposed to what many
people believe to be is movement. By analyzing movement, time, spatiality, and how
many people are involved in order to create a comic book or film, we will find comic art
might be different, but has as many advantages over film.
In “Narrative in Comics,” Henry John Pratt discussed the relationship between
comic art and film. He stated, “It may even be noted that many basic and important film
techniques like panning, tracking, and zooming are largely unavailable in comics, which
are unable to produce the illusion o f movement” (115). These techniques are important
for film because the public’s expectations o f a comic adaptation are high. They need to
be action-packed with special effects, camera techniques, and fast cut-away shots in order
to achieve that sense o f quick movement. Comic books have always portrayed the
illusion o f movement. As a sequential art form, the pictures are always in motion
because the eye is directed from left to right to visually read the image. The problem is
that now in the 21st century, films have the technological resources to be able to take

65

comic adaptations to such an advanced level that nothing can compete. Yet, when we
breakdown comic films, they have made a huge profit from pirating comics, albeit with
consent o f course. This can be seen in Ang Lee’s The Hulk and Mathew Vaughn’s Kick
Ass. Lee and Vaughn purposely used vivid colors, quick wipes, zooms, and split screens
within the film to resemble an on-screen comic book. Obviously these kinetic techniques
are successful on the page as well as film because that is where they originated.
Giannetti highlighted the importance o f movement in film. He displayed a picture o f
Batman Begins with Christian Bale in his Batman suit walking towards camera
aggressively. He is surrounded by hundreds o f bats flying into frame (see fig. 6).


As a viewer looking at a movie still in a book, the basic concept o f movement is read and
understood even though the picture is not physically moving. Therefore, what
differentiates film from comic art is that a film has a pace o f twenty-four frames per
second and comic art’s pace is dependent on the individual reader. Pratt’s argument is

66

not about whether comic art is able to convey movement. He is suggesting film moves
forward at a set pace so it does not allow the viewer much time to dissect and process,
where as comic art is static and thus an easier art medium to process. Therefore, the heart
of the difference between comic art and film is the length o f time a visual narrative
allows one to fully understand it. In addition, when reading comics, the focus is directed
solely to the reader so time is not a factor; however, it does not stop there. The reader has
a job. He or she must associate icons, images, and memory in order to activate the
comic. Thus, comics offer more interaction on the reader’s part as opposed to film,
which has a time frame. Pratt maintains, “Because a reader o f comics can take as much
time as he or she wants to process a narrative, comics allow the reader to dwell on
meanings and imagery in a way that is simply impossible in art forms like film that force
a certain speed o f perception” (112).
Another difference between comic art and film is spatiality. Even though they are
both spatial and sequential art forms, film has the ability to take away the panels that
comic art is traditionally boxed into. McCloud states, “Each successive frame o f a movie
is projected on exactly the same space- the screen- while each frame o f comics must
occupy a different space” (Understanding Comics 7). For instance, comic art takes up a
sequence o f different panels, but each panel is almost always adjacent to each other on
the page. Therefore, comic artists have more restricted space to determine the character’s
facial features, behavioral characteristics, location, etc., whereas the images in film take
up the same space continuously. It can be argued that even though comic dimensions are
smaller than film, they provide the reader with more insight to the character because

67

every detail must be met accurately. From here we can see where comic art has an
advantage over film. Film may have greater spatial freedom, but too much detail could
also leave more room for continuity error and distraction.
Another aspect to consider is filmmaking is a massive collaborative effort, and
comic art generally consists o f a small team or single individual. For example, the film
The Dark Knight had a crew o f over 500 people, while the first Batman comic book had a
creative team, led by Bill Finger consisting o f four people (Finger). Therefore, another
advantage o f a comic artist is that they have more control over their art and storyline than
a filmmaker does over a movie. Comic art will always provide the foundation that film
has banked off of. For instance, costume design and makeup artistry are the most visual
elements that reflect how influential comic art is to film.
Comic artists have created characters with specific looks, such as Captain
America, Batman, The Hulk, Superman, Poison Ivy, Dick Tracy, The Joker, etc. that film
has successfully portrayed on screen. However, The Joker would not be the man
everyone has come to love and or hate if all o f a sudden he donned a makeup-free face
while wearing jeans and a t-shirt. For this reason, costume designers and makeup artists
are challenged to re-create the established comic character that the audience already has a
rapport with. Luckily, in the new modem digital age, it is easy to tweak the old into the
new without taking away the traditional look o f the character. This also reveals how
adaptable comic art is. For example, when we look how Oscar-winning costume
designer Alexandra Byme assembled costumes for The Avengers, we will find she
purposely mixed period pieces, fantasy, and comic book colors into the characters looks.

68

Nathalie Atkinson, a reporter for the National Post summarized Byrne’s specific costume
breakdown for Captain America and The Hulk:
Our frustrated lantern-jawed hero Steve Rogers puts in time at the
gym in Rocky’s loose sweatpants and a threadbare undershirt. His slightly
retro street clothes speak to his 1940s roots: high-waisted pleated trousers,
plaid shirt and brown leather bomber jacket with epaulettes, like the
classic leading man in a Howard Hawks aviation adventure (Cary Grant in
Only Angels Have Wings, et al.). Picking up where costumer Anna
Sheppard left off in last year’s Captain America, Byrne sticks to the
original primary colours and overall shape but swaps the padded, bulky
sculpted leather o f that World War Two-era costume for the latest hightech stretch materials.
Fitting Mark Ruffalo’s mellow Bruce Banner, he’s initially shown
warm tones o f shades pulled from an Indian spice market. In the Calcutta
heat, Banner slouches in a rumpled brown linen suit, deeply faded around
the lapels and collar from sweat, sun and constant wear, over a linen shirt
(equally wrinkled) the colour o f paprika. On his feet are practical, scuffed
suede Wallabees. Byme never forgets why w e’re watching, however, and
later when a faded purple shirt makes an appearance, you know Banner’s
alter-ego the Hulk can’t be far off. (Atkinson)
Byme took what was on the page and made it alive on screen. Additionally, if anyone
did not know a character’s background history, their clothes immediately translate class,

69

self-image, psychological state, period, etc. Alternatively, even if the costumes are not as
comfortable for the actor, they still need to look the part o f a superhero or villain in order
to capture the essence o f a comic book character. For example, Giannetti discusses the
suits that Val Kilmer and Chris O ’Donnell wore for the film, Batman Forever. “The
actual bodies o f Kilmer and O’Donnell, though perfectly respectable, are not quite
Michelangeloesque: The suits were designed to add muscles here and there and to flatten
a few inconvenient protuberances” (354).
Makeup artistry also transforms the actor and brings forward the true character.
This is clearly seen in the film Dick Tracy. Special makeup effect artists John Caglione
Jr. and Doug Drexler brought Chester Gould’s visions to life. There were twenty-one
villains in the movie, and “The makeup used for all the villains was based directly on
how they were drawn by Chester Gould in the original comic strip” (“Dick Tracy, Did
you know?”). Dick Tracy also won the academy award for Best Makeup. Being that
Caglione Jr. and Drexler stayed true to re-creating Gould’s original characters, their
Oscar statue should be shared with him. It was also reported, “The main colors in the
film are the six that the original comic strip appeared in: red, blue, yellow, green, orange,
purple, plus black and white” (“Dick Tracy, Did you know?”). Gould’s original character
creations are a true testament to comic art as an influential, praised, and adaptable art
form.
Comic artists laid the groundwork on paper for what television and film could
prosper from. Pratt said, “McCloud believes a roll o f film laid out instead o f projected is
just a very slow comic” (113), and McCloud stated, “It’s a mistake to see comics a mere

70

hybrid of the graphic arts and prose fiction. What happens between these panels is a kind
o f magic only comics can create” ( Understanding Comics 92). Television and film has
been able to re-create the magical formula comics established, although it took time for
technology to accurately simulate the comic book universe. From the 1960s to the
1990’s, the vast majority o f comic books adapted for television had an average
production run o f two to three seasons, despite covering the best selling comic books.
These include Batman, The Green Hornet, The Incredible Hulk, The New Adventures o f
Wonder Woman, and The Amazing Spider-Man.37 In the 1990s, technology caught up to
the comic art medium, and computer generated imagery (CGI) became the primary
method for achieving special effects in television and film. Once CGI was successfully
able to produce realistic virtual worlds, creating the comic world was easier to replicate.
As a result, audiences were more enthralled with the special effects that transcended from
the page to the screen, and show ratings have never been higher. For example, Smallville
and The Walking Dead have held their own in the ratings and popularity thanks to CGI
and special makeup effects. Furthermore, The Walking Dead is one o f the highest rated
television shows on basic cable. HUFFPOST TV reported, “According to the network,
The Walking Dead is the Number one drama series in basic cable history with men 1834” (“Walking Dead ratings”). It is also important to address that all these live action
shows have crossed over into successful animated series. Comic artists created the world
that we get to see projected on screen. It was evident from the beginning that they would
lay the foundation for what would be able to reach beyond the paper and cross over into
any visual art medium. Thanks to 21st century technology, blockbuster films have also

71

been able to successfully re-create the comic universe. Lee maintains, “major motion
pictures have reached a level o f special-effects magic that rivals comic books for sheer
jaw-dropping visuals and excitement” (Stan L e e ’s How To Draw 117).
Garyn G. Roberts identifies how comics have influenced blockbuster movies. He
believes the year o f 2003 brought in many movies based on comic books, in part, due to
the September 11, 2001, attacks on America, which Roberts believes represents the same
societal tone as the Great Depression.38 He asserts blockbuster movies, such as
Daredevil, X-Men 2, The Hulk, and The League o f Extraordinary Gentlemen, helped
Americans escape from the real life horrors o f terrorism, death, depression, and tragedy.
“For these reasons and more, sequential arts and advances o f graphic storytelling found in
the pages of newspapers, comic books, and graphic novels at the turn o f the millennium
were and are as popular and profitable as ever” (Roberts 210). Furthermore, Matthew P.
McAllister, Ian Gordon, and Mark Jancovich’s “Block Buster Art House: Meets
Superhero Comic, or Meets Graphic Novel?: The Contradictory relationship between
Film and Comic Art” contends:
More important, modem comic book based films have helped establish the
industrial formula o f the Hollywood popcorn blockbuster: fantastic action
movie as cultural event. Comic book materials attract a youthful movie
going demographic, appeal to nostalgic older audiences, and offer thrills
and well-defined archetype characters, especially heroes who also have
well-established track records for popularity, licensing, and sequel
potential. (110)

72

Comic books are synonymous with big budget Hollywood blockbuster movies.
For example, one month after its release date, The Avengers grossed a billion dollars
worldwide (“Avengers,” IMDB). Alternatively, comic adapted movies do not have to be
blockbusters in order to entertain the masses. Independent films, such as American
Splendor, Scott Pilgrim vs. the World, and The Crow prove that creative success can be
measured outside o f Hollywood budget standards. Like underground comics, they have a
cult following that is not measured by money. One more example is the animated film,
Fritz The Cat, based on Robert Crumb’s comic. The film is a cult-classic, because even
though animated, it was never intended for children. It was the first animated film to
receive an X-rating from the Motion Picture Association o f America. Additionally, it
was the first independent animated film to gross more than one hundred million dollars at
the box office (“Fritz, Did You Know”). The film follows Crumb’s comic strip character
Fritz, a sex-crazed, con artist cat, who experiences everything about the 1960s, including
-)Q

drugs, sex, and the Black Panthers.
Regardless if comic book adapted films are blockbusters or independents,
technology has taken over everyone’s lives. As an art form, comic books are clearly seen
as adaptable and successful, and therefore will always stay modem in some way.
However, what is the future of comics if paper is out, and CGI is in?

73

CHAPTER 8

THE FUTURE OF COMICS

The Internet and digital technology have revolutionized all forms o f
communication, and comics are no exception. They have adapted seamlessly into the
technological era, so much so that generations to come will have a hard time seeing them
otherwise. For instance, comics have evolved from print to on-screen to Internet to 3-D.
There will always be those who appreciate the archaic forms o f art, such as print, vinyl
records, 16mm film, etc., but more and more digital is becoming the preferred medium.
Comics are no different because they too have been replaced with digital technology.
Kids are growing up in a digital world, and we will soon be at in age where they do not
remember what it feels like to hold or read a book. Therefore, the preferred format for
many is not necessarily determined by what is traditional, but by what kids want. They
have become the new demographic to cater to. It is not easy to accept that the process of
modernization will never stop, but it is important to understand that comics are
opportunistic. They have and will continue to adapt, educate, and integrate history with
art, regardless o f the art medium. “Marvel watched the Berlin Wall fall, lived through
9/11 and even celebrated Obama’s election by letting the current Prez make an
appearance in The Amazing Spider-Man #583” (“Complete History”). Discussing how
comics have adapted to technology and transitioned between print art and digital media
will conclude how they will continue to influence generations for decades to come.
The 21st century brought with it the advancement o f computer technology for comic

74

artists to revel and play with. New methods have replaced the old ones. For instance,
email, scan, fax, websites, digital lettering, an infinite choice in color palette,
Webcomics, and 3D have taken over mail, talking in person, hand lettering, a limited
color palette, and paper. Computer technology has improved productivity and reinvented
the way comic book artists illustrate their work. Furthermore, artists have re-introduced
old stories and archaic methods with new technology for new generations to follow and
carry on reading.
Digital lettering vs. hand lettering can be seen as a more productive element within
comic art. Computer programs provide the artist with an endless supply o f digital
lettering fonts as well as styles. It can also be done in considerably less time.
Alternatively, hand lettering is more organic and natural looking; however, it is a tedious
art form in which the artist must develop perfect penmanship, patience, and an eye for
balance and detail. In today’s technological age, where instant gratification is important,
digital lettering is an advantage. Comic artists have realized this and jumped on the
bandwagon to mix best of both worlds. “There are, literally, thousands o f styles o f there
ready for your perusal, some o f them created by the best hand letterers in the business”
(Lee, “Stan Lee’s How To Draw” 176).
Computers have also reinvented how comic art visually looks. This is attributed to
the prominent storyteller element: color. It sets the tone o f right, wrong, mood, time, etc.,
and technology has provided an infinite range o f colors to choose from. Stan Lee has
reminisced how comic books were once printed on cheap newsprint with a very limited
choice o f colors. “Not anymore! The advent o f computer color, not to mention much

IS

improved printing and paper stocks arms you with choices as wide as your imagination”
(“Stan Lee’s How To Draw” 180).
Webcomics have also replaced print comics. Yet many comic artists have argued
whether Webcomics are here to stay. Although, in the digital age, it is more a question of
how long print will stay. Each art medium carries different benefits, but when they come
together we will discover they are beautifully cohesive.
The benefits o f print are many. As classic storylines and artists have been around
longer, readers have a more established rapport with the artist, characters, and storyline.
Print comics also hold more collectability and monetary value. There is also the
physicality o f holding a book. Alternatively, there are many benefits to Webcomics.
They have easy portability and lower cost, and with Internet access anyone can create
them. Also, as on online commodity, there is an increased chance o f impulse buying, and
instant global readership. Furthermore, artists have a more controlled environment, since
it is a self-publishing virtual medium. Although there are benefits to either process, many
comic creators have met in the middle and taken full advantage o f both mediums. Comic
artists that continue to use traditional pen and ink use the Internet to advertise their own
material and stay current, while Webcomic artists print their artwork as posters or as a
collection, to sell to the public. Furthermore, The Google Chrome comic is an example
where print and technology have mutually come together. In 2008, comic artist Scott
McCloud was hired to create a comic book for Google employees with the intent to
instruct them on how the new browser worked (“Google Chrome”).
Furthermore, a museum, defined as one o f the oldest and most traditional

76

institutions that houses different collections o f artifacts, paintings, and sculptures of
cultural and historical importance, has also become a part o f the digital revolution. With
the continuing expansion of digital media, museums have had a facelift. The most
prestigious museums now include free virtual exhibits so anyone in the world can explore
and study. Two such examples are the Google Art Project and The Cartoon Art Museum.
The Google Art Project was launched in 2011. Its mission is to expand and globally
showcase museum collections, including comic art, to visitors via the Internet. The
project shows 360-degree images o f the galleries to make one feel like they are physically
in the museum. Therefore, visitors can be at home browsing collections by artist, art
medium, art period, or country o f any museum they want (“Art project”). Michelle
Maltais, a reporter for The Los Angeles Times stated, “The site started with about 1,000
objects and now has over 150 collections with 30,000 artworks. Diana Skaar o f the
Google project told Culture Monster that 20 million users have visited the site and have
set up 200,000 user "collections" o f favorite images” (Maltais). Additionally, the
Cartoon Art Museum in 2009 exhibited the Monsters o f Webcomics. It showcased a
variety o f the best work published on the Internet. Nine comic artists were featured and
their art ranged from panels to graphic novels, comedy to drama, and historical to science
fiction. Stephanie Wright Hession, a reporter for The San Francisco Chronicle
interviewed Andrew Farago, the Cartoon Art Museum’s curator and gallery manager
about the exhibition. She reported that, “Farago also installed a Monsters o f Webcomics
Virtual Gallery containing more than 300 comics by more than 100 artists, ranging from
simple pencil drawings to lush watercolors, which visitors can access through a computer

77

at the museum” (Hession). With the success o f The Google Art Project and Cartoon Art
Museum, museums have proved technology can successfully merge with high culture.
Alternatively, in the future, if paintings are not confined to the wall and comics are not
confined to paper anymore, will museums and comic book stores be able to survive the
digital era?
Most museums are nationally funded. Therefore, people who share a common
history, state, country, or government collectively aid in preserving a museum. Museums
might have budget cuts on account o f lack o f ticket sales due to technology and poor
economy, but there should not be any fear they will close down. This is simply because
there are substantially more people invested in keeping history alive. Alternatively, with
a small business, such as a comic book store, there are less people involved to help keep
it afloat. Additionally, since there are so many comic artists and comic books to choose
from, digitally reading comics does provide the convenience o f having a stocked library
at one’s fingertips. Joe Field, owner o f Flying Color’s Comics commented on the future
of comic book stores. He maintains:
I also know, based on anecdotes from customers who were involved, that a
Big Company that recently did a very involved consumer research project
found that comic fans love the in-store experience and socializing they get
whenever they visit their favorite shop. These consumers were told of
special deals and incentives they could get for being in a big club o f digital
comic fans—and they still didn’t want to give up their local shop
experience, (qtd. in O ’Rourke)

78

Field continues to discuss that comic book business owners do need to step up their
game, and give their customers something the digital world can’t provide. One example
is in-store signings. Comic book conventions should also be considered as one o f the
best vehicles to bring in fans, and celebrate everyone involved in the world o f comics.
Comic book conventions, such as WonderCon and Comic-Con, gather an
impressive array of comic publishers, artists, art, graphic novels, presentations,
masquerading, awards, signings, anime, video games, toys, and film premieres for
anyone to enjoy. They even have speed dating for any masked avenger to participate in
and find love.40 These conventions continue to show how popular comics are. For
instance in 1970, Comic-Con drew in a crowd of 300 people. Today, San Diego ComicCon is the largest convention in America and the New York Comic-Con is second largest
in the country. San Diego is also “fourth largest in the world after the Comiket in Japan,
the Angouleme International Comics in France, and the Lucca Comics and Games in
Italy, filling to capacity the San Diego Convention Center with over 130,000 attendees in
2010” (“San Diego”). Additionally, WonderCon celebrated its 25th anniversary in 2011.
When we take a look back at the past, there is an obvious difference due to technology.
Social media has provided a global connection to bring commonalities together. On the
WonderCon website, one has a bottomless array o f interactive online features he or she
can click on. Some of the icons to choose from are e-mail, post-on Facebook, tweet,
bookmark and share-with-others, follow on YouTube, download free Comic-Con apps,
scroll through the program list o f events, etc. (“WonderCon”). Yet, even though
technology has changed how the world communicates and works together, one thing has

79

remained the same in the comic conventions throughout the years. They are the largest
events because they are run and attended by people who are passionate about comics. In
Gary Sassaman’s WonderCon Program Book and Schedule 2011, he believes comics
always start with that first impression. He stated:
It can be a comic book at a friend’s house, or a TV show with a man in a
cape. It’s the allure o f that spinner rack at the local mom and pop grocery
store, with all those colorful covers gleaming out at you. Whatever that
first impression is, it somehow carries over throughout your life. (18)
In the digital age, however, children’s first exposure to comics have begun not in print,
but either online or on screen.
When comics were no longer confined to paper, Webcomics should be considered
the steppingstone for what came next. Comic apps, comics on iPads, and 3D video
games and movies have now replaced Webcomics as the newest trends. Marvel has
taken advantage o f all o f the above. In April 2012, they announced a two-part project
called the ReEvolution initiative project. The first part includes a new digital app called
Marvel Augmented Reality. It allows readers to use their cellphones or iPads to access
DVD bonus features, such as the process o f tracing, coloring, and creator commentaries
for selected print comics. Infinite is the second part o f the ReEvolution project. It is an
all-digital environment for comic artists to create art that would not necessarily be
possible in print form. For only ninety-nine cents, one will find digital comics that cross
over with already established print comics (McMillan).
Since comic art has rapidly changed to meet technology’s standards, artists and fans

80

have had to change the way they have created and read comics. For artists, computer
software and online programs have made it very easy to create a comic. With a click o f a
button one has a broader and brighter color range, the ability to draw finer lines,
smoother transitional visual tricks, and the pacing o f the dialogue bubbles perfectly time
out. Additionally, digital comic layouts are built to fit the most breakthrough technology.
The new retina display on an iPad, for example, is so densely pixelated that one cannot
distinguish individual pixels at a normal viewing distance. Now, one sees the whole
picture in a way he or she never could before. As a result, everything feels lifelike, with
sharp detail and rich colors. Chris Sims, a writer for the Comics Alliance reported
positively on the ReEvolution project. He states:
It lends a cinematic quality to it while still remaining a comic, which
works worlds better than the false sense o f movement that you get from
the abominations that are Motion Comics. Which is the thing about the
way Infinite works. It doesn't just feel like a panel that's photocopied with
some digital trickery added in. They feel like distinct moments that
advance the story, using changes in perspective and pacing to convey new
information and advance the story. (Sims)
Even though this new technology offers more visual stimulation, people could argue
comic art is becoming less o f a traditional art form and instead more o f an animated
movie, especially as the newest technological toy 3D has boomed.
In the 21st century, new television sets, video games, and cameras are equipped
with 3D capability.41 More important, 3D technology is so advanced, it is not going

81

anywhere anytime soon, but that was not always the case. In the mid 1950s, when
comics were competing with television and film, comic publishers needed to step up their
game. In 1953, Joe Kubert wrote the first 3D print comic for Three Dimension Comics
#1. The issue featured Mighty Mouse and was an initial success, considering it sold over
a million copies. However, within two years, the trend o f 3D print comics faded out and
many publishers felt it would never make a comeback. The 3D trend in print might not
have made it, but in the digital age 3D has made a huge difference in modernizing comic
art.
3D software and cameras are groundbreaking because they have the ability to
present the illusion o f depth. The 3D digital perspective, as opposed to 3D print, gives
one the ability to layer images and color seamlessly. Therefore, the image as a whole is
more visually defined. Along with the ReEvolution project, Marvel has also been a part
o f the 3D boom. They have taken advantage o f using 3D to heighten one’s film and
video game experience. In two years, Marvel movies such as, Thor, Captain America:
The First Avenger, Ghost Rider: Spirit o f Vengeance, The Avengers, and The Amazing
Spider-Man, have been shot in 2D, but converted into 3D in the post-production process.
3D video comic games are the new comic art form to reprise the origin o f comic
book characters. Warner Brother’s Interactive has created 3D games, such as the Batman
Arkham Asylum and The Green Lantern: Rise o f the Manhunters, to display the
superhero’s trajectory for any newcomer to play and learn. The initial primary purpose
o f comic art was to bring hope and escape from world tragedy. Now, comic art immerses
one into the story with the intention to live in the action. 3D games capture what it would

82

feel like to be a superhero since the player is the virtual superhero. Essentially, one is
acting as director and actor. The whole experience gravitates toward a much more epic
reality because in contrast to regular video games, 3D offers an open world design. A
player has the freedom to roam wherever he or she likes without having an anchor point
to stop them from moving forward. 3D games also use motion-capture technology. This
method creates a more cinematic perspective because it allows the player to be
completely stimulated and immersed in the game. Additionally, 3D games allow the
player to challenge people from around the world, choose different side missions, and as
an incentive to play, offers free digital comic books throughout the game.
Marvel Entertainment has announced they are teaming up to create more 3D games
based on the blockbuster films The Amazing Spider-Man and The Avengers. Marvel has
dominated in print, online, film, and can now add space to their amazing resume. Marvel
Studios announced in May 2012 that they have collaborated with NASA to screen the
Avengers to their astronauts in space:
Marvel Studios arranged with NASA to transfer their record-breaking
blockbuster film “Marvel’s The Avengers” to NASA’s Mission Control in
Houston, which will uplink the film to the International Space Station
(ISS), currently orbiting 220 miles above Earth. The film will then be
screened for the space station crew’s exclusive enjoyment.
(“Marvel’s The Avengers”)
Furthermore, Dan Cook, the Psychological Support Coordinator for NASA’s Johnson
Space Center, spoke about screening The Avengers. He stated:

83

Films, books, and music offer important aspects o f psychological support
for astronauts on long-duration missions, such as those on the
International Space Station (ISS). These are the types o f things that help
to keep the crew connected to home, which is a huge morale boost while
being away for long periods o f time. (“Marvel’s The Avengers”)
Marvel is continuously changing to meet the demands o f technology and please
their loyal fans. Comics have now been proven successful in any art medium and any
place, for example on canvas, print, online, on screen, in museums, and outer space.
Regardless o f how comics are seen, they will always provide morale, support, education,
historical relevance, and visual stimulation.
Comic art is a most special and unique art medium because it is both traditional
and the most adaptable art form. So what is next? The comic world is waiting for the
next cutting edge technology to advance further into the great technological abyss. We
do know that Sony Online Entertainment announced they have created innovative facial
recognition technology for video games. With this new technology, players have
characters that take role-playing to the next level. It is the ability to create your own
avatar using webcams and motion controlled cameras. The cameras instantly transfer
one’s exact facial expressions, body movements, voice recognition, etc., into the
character on screen. Unfortunately, with gamers becoming more reclusive due to
technology, avatars will not help. Although there is always hope that people will tire o f
watching themselves.
When researching what the next trend in comics could be I discovered that 3D has

84

already turned into 4D, in the comfort o f one’s own home. This is reference to a product
called ScentScape that works in-conjunction with video games. It is a cartridge filled
with twenty different aromas for the player to help further immerse him or herself in the
game. The website maintains, “synched with the action, scent-enabled media directs the
release o f ScentScape™ scents providing background scents such as pine forest or ocean
and from more scene related scents such as flowers and smoke to games or entertainment
media” (“Delivering”). As much as the ScentScape is amusing to think about, I have a
hunch this will not be the next comic trend to infiltrate homes.42
Perhaps the future o f comics lies in the first simulated superhero hologram. When
the technological geniuses are working outside o f the box, it is the perfect solution.
Unlike the hologram technique used in many films like Star Wars or Thor, video games
could be played outside o f a screen. Now that comics have been successful in adapting to
the most groundbreaking 3D digital world, there is concrete reasoning that they could be
easily converted when 3D is replaced with something greater. Regardless o f the next
technological advancement, it is evident that comic art will be a part o f it. Thus, the
trajectory o f comic art can be seen as a magical art form that is far from over. The comic
art industry, which is now made up o f art, newspaper comic strips, comic books, films,
museums, auctions, Webcomics, conventions, and video games, is clearly a force to be
reckoned with. Even if print is becoming extinct, I have a suspicious feeling comic art
will continue to thrive.

85

CHAPTER 9

CONCLUSION

The researcher can conclude from this paper that within comic art’s trajectory, it
has influenced the art and humanities world, and societal change. This study reveals that
comics have successfully encompassed every genre. They have been historical, funny,
political, fantasy, digital, horror, 2D, 3D, etc. However, it is also clearly evident that
comics carry so much more depth than being just highly adaptable.
After introducing comic art as the modem day sequential art form, the research
proves that comic book artists use the same fundamental techniques as traditional artists.
This is seen within examples o f Art Spiegelman, Will Eisner, and Stan Lee’s comic art.
Each one showed that comics are not just “books.” They are about an artist’s process to
create a world where the narrative and the image, the good and the bad, and opposing
colors, shapes, and lines are well balanced.
Superheroes are what everyone, at some point o f their life, dreams o f being.
Comic book covers, particularly from the Golden Age, are great examples o f why
superheroes and comic art are so memorable and valuable. Along with their hidden
propaganda, covers were major influencers o f social and political change, and still
continue to sell for as much as traditional paintings. Unfortunately, the research shows
that comics have had a turbulent relationship with gallery artists, as they believe it is a
lowbrow art. However, comic cover sales further show that a comics place within art
culture should be as popular and high grossing as any other art movement. It should even

86
be considered the most dominant art form considering it is Pulitzer Prize winning.
After researching the elements within comic art, it is easy to conclude how
diverse o f a resource it is. Comic artists strategically use signs, symbols,
anthropomorphic animals, and superheroes to entertain and educate the masses. Each
study reveals comics have inspired a new conscious thought about serious issues, such as
drugs, race, sex, class, and homosexuality. The researcher can conclude that it is easy for
people to visualize why Superman and Captain America are American heroes, but what
should be synonymous with their image is an understanding o f why they were created in
the first place. Therefore, an important element for everyone to comprehend from this
paper is how autobiographical comics really are. Examples from Spiegelman and Eisner
further conclude that the superhero and the artist have led similar lives. Thus, comic art
clearly illustrates the human spirit, and is the most relatable art form. Furthermore, with
the success o f comic-adapted films, comic characters are also the most lucrative on the
big screen. Yet, regardless o f how comic art is seen, it continues to be the most
adaptable, memorable, and traditional art form that exists today. Therefore, it is easy to
see that comic book art is a visual language that will continue to influence societal
change and heighten creative innovation within other entertainment medias.
In conclusion, it is no secret how popular superheroes are. What is fascinating is
when someone is asked who their favorite superhero is, there usually is not an instant
response. This is not because there is such a plethora to choose from, but because there
are so many influential and cherished moments in comic book history that people take
away. Who is yours?
