Book reviews

perception by supporting the emerging directors of the time. Producers such as
Robert Evans, Julia Phillips, and Samuel Z. Arkoff played an important role in
changing the perception that the director was the sole author of the work.
Lew Wasserman, head of Universal Studios and one of the last real movie
moguls of the Classical Hollywood era, takes on a central role in Douglas
Gomery’s chapter on The New Hollywood. Gomery contrasts Wasserman as the
sole decision-maker at Universal with the power distribution model of Columbia.
He then describes the Peter Stark Producing Program at the University of Southern
California that equally emphasized the creative and managerial aspects of filmmaking, that Gomery experienced himself in the 1980s. These insights, mainly based
on Gromery’s connection to producer Stacey Sher, almost feel like a promotion
for the programme as USC.
In the last chapter, Grantham and Miller investigate the modern marketplace,
which is characterized by new technologies, new production collaborations, and
new audiences that inform pricing strategies and new forms of funding for film
production. Film production is as much a cultural and creative process, as it is a
political and economic ordeal, controlled by an industry that constantly reinvents
itself. New streaming services, such as Amazon and Netflix are just a few of the
examples alluded to in the chapter.
The historical trajectory of the book remains fluid and consistent, despite the
fact that different authors covered the different time eras and developments in the
book. The multi-authorial aspect is actually a strength as the book is peppered with
insights, anecdotes, and stories that the diverse range of authors brings to the
table. The book is part of a series of books comprised of ten volumes calling
attention to topics such as acting, cinematography, or screenwriting, and is a
valuable source for the lay readers, scholars and students, as well as those working
in the field.
BIRGIT M. SCHNEIDMUELLER
York University
© 2017, Birgit M. Schneidmueller
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01439685.2016.1273334

The Marvel Studios Phenomenon: Inside a Transmedia Universe
MARTIN FLANAGAN, MIKE MCKENNY, and ANDREW LIVINGSTONE, 2016
New York, Bloomsbury Academic
pp. 268, illus., £96.00 (cloth)
The Marvel Studios Phenomenon (2016) rigorously defines the history of an organization in both creative and industrial terms as it transitions from its inception in
1961 as Timely Comics to the current Marvel Studios empire owned by the Walt
Disney Corporation. While beginning in the realm of print publishing, authors
Martin Flanagan, Mike McKenny and Andy Livingstone ground their analysis of this
global media phenomenon in the history of the film industry and its business

147

148

Book reviews

practices, creative modes and cultural interventions. The three authors, given their
academic expertise – film studies, film and business studies and transmedia and
comic book adaptations – are uniquely positioned to provide a multidisciplinary
and in-depth portrait of Marvel Studios.
Considering the prominent role that the ‘superhero film’ has come to play in
the contemporary film industry, and the role of Marvel Studios in driving this
development, The Marvel Studios Phenomenon presents an important industrial analysis
and history for both fans of the Marvel Universe/Marvel Cinematic Universe and
film and media studies scholars. Film scholars in particular will appreciate the
careful attention to a plethora of analytic concepts, which the authors carefully
explain as they come into their larger analysis. The text is suitable for wider
audiences as well as for upper-level undergraduate and graduate courses. One
might learn and teach the concepts of organizational identity, vertical integration,
world-building, convergence, transmedia storytelling, deal culture/package-unit
production, licensing, Fordist studio models, the event film and more. While
making use of these models and methods, however, the authors highlight the
unique challenges faced by Marvel, such as how it maintains (and at times lost) its
sprawling organizational identity, its control and use of intellectual property
such as the Marvel characters, its negotiation of shifting textual modes from comics
to video games, television, and film and its creation of ‘its own fictive biography’
(p. 205).
Contributing to the strength of the book is the fact that the chapters are
arranged thematically rather than chronologically, with each of the eight chapters
unfolding a particular dimension of the Marvel Studios phenomenon. The first half
of the book is organized around the interrelated strategies Marvel navigated in
order to adapt to shifts in consumption. The authors argue,
It is important to attend to how Marvel has plotted and realized a transmedia
storytelling strategy that maximizes industrial systems geared to convergence,
while (initially) shaping an image of itself as the most potently, independently
new/old ‘kid on the block’ of popular Hollywood production (p. 41).
Chapter One focuses on this transition in primarily industrial terms, whereas
Chapter Two takes up the narrative question of world-building and the Marvel
Universe, and Chapter Three shifts to genre and aesthetic questions. Chapter Four
makes use of the previous three chapters to situate Captain America as a centre of
the contemporary Marvel Universe, while Chapter Five focuses on superhero teams
(e.g. Guardians of the Galaxy) that have moulded the wider universe.
The theme that leads each aspect of the authors’ analyses is that maintaining creative control and integrity helped Marvel both transition to new modes of textual
production and overcome slumps in the studio’s past. Like Stan Lee, Kevin Feige
becomes the Marvel ‘auteur’ that helps to maintain the integrity of the intellectual
property and connect fans to Marvel’s organization identity via direct intervention –
consider Stan Lee’s cameos, for example. Noting Feige’s particularly important role,
the authors observe, ‘tellingly… the public and criticism continue to understand the
flow of creative credit as well as the flow of money; Feige is a producer rather than a
director’ (p. 42). While this seems to suggest something unique about Marvel’s integration of art and commerce, it is worth noting that their analysis actually mirror’s

Book reviews

Irving Thalberg’s creative/industrial control of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer from the 20s
to 30s, which launched the success of the studio. In this regard, the history of Marvel
provides an important lesson about the contemporary film industry’s return to strategies that created great success in the past.
Chapters Six and Seven (re)focus on industrial developments, such as the risk
of market saturation and the company’s decision to bring out the B-list characters.
Chapter Seven examines Marvel’s current position within the contemporary media
landscape and its similarities with Pixar (also owned by the Walt Disney
Company). The authors providing a comparison, point out, for example, that both
studios ‘continue to be acclaimed with an intense dedication to getting creative
processes right, and this helps to revamp impressions of the whole Disney infrastructure’ (p. 173). Chapter Eight gives a detailed account of key characteristics of
Marvel’s transmedia empire with emphasis on the importance of transmedia storytelling that glues the Marvel feature films with the network television shows, the
videogames and tie-in comics.
The conclusion brilliantly ties all the chapters together and while the authors
indicate a bit of uncertainty about the future of Marvel, they contend it is a
quintessential contemporary studio with ‘an identity’. Marvel Studios is a ‘company
with a strong vision in pursuit of a clear house style, dominant in its genre zone,
and expressing all this through a USP (the shared universe) that has its competitors
scrambling in emulation’ (p. 197). Marvel, similar to Pixar, is in the business of
narrating its own ‘brand mythology’ (p. 204), thus Marvel’s ‘biggest ever epic’
(p. 205) is Marvel Studios itself, and we, the audience need only to sit back and
see how the rest of the story unfolds.
KATALIN LUSTYIK and MATTHEW HOLTMEIER
Ithaca College
© 2017, Katalin Lustyik and Matthew Holtmeier
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01439685.2016.1273333

