The Evolving Portrayal of Female Emotions in the Marvel
Cinematic Universe

ABSTRACT

Historically, female characters in comic books have largely been
assigned to supporting roles, dressed to cater to the male gaze,
or sometimes disregarded as mere plot devices to advance the
stories of male characters. In more recent years, this has started
to change with a select number of female characters’ stories
being highlighted by major blockbuster releases. This article will
explore the way that female representation has evolved in the
Marvel Cinematic Universe over the past decade, with special
focus on three key scenes in Marvel’s The Avengers, Captain
Marvel, and WandaVision that reflect an evolution in the way
that female emotions are handled within the narrative of these
franchises. Discussion will be given to the way these pop culture
messages influence the work that feminist therapists do with
clients from a narrative perspective.

KEYWORDS


Marvel Cinematic Universe;
emotions; stereotypes; comic
books

Comic books have a mixed history when it comes to the representation of their
female characters. Criticism has been fairly aimed at the industry for histori­
cally catering to the male gaze at the expense of taking the strength of its
female characters seriously. A simple Google image search of “1990s comic
book women” followed by “1990s comic book men” returns results of char­
acters wearing wildly differing amounts of clothing, which is only a fraction of
the evidence supporting the overt objectification and sexualization that female
comic book characters experience both in the pages of these books and the
films they have now been adapted into. Only in recent years have we seen the
elevation of female characters in comic book properties begin to focus more on
the strength and vitality of these characters and less on their necklines.
	One of the stereotypes that has been used to suppress the expansion of
female characters in the past has been the thought that women are inherently
more emotional than men, have a harder time controlling these feelings than
their male counterparts, and are thus unfit for center stage on their various
super teams. This has relegated female characters to supporting roles, or
worse, as the victims of an unfortunate trope that sees them held captive or
killed in order to advance the story of a male character. This phenomenon has
been so frequent in comics that it has led to a concept known among comic
fans as “fridging,” a reference to a now infamous issue of Green Lantern in
which Kyle Rayner (i.e., the Green Lantern) returns home to find that his
girlfriend has been murdered and stuffed into a refrigerator in his apartment;
it is a needless death meant only to propel his own conflict with the villain
forward (Marz, 1994). The term was initially coined by comic book blogger
turned writer Gail Simone in the late 1990s and represents just one of the
many tropes that female characters often fall victim to in the pages of these
stories (Romano & Abad-Santos, 2018).
	These gender-based stereotypes are (slowly) starting to shift. In the ever
expanding and perpetually popular Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU), three
female characters have been elevated to the level at which projects have been
developed that are primarily centered on their stories; by the end of 2021,
Captain Marvel (aka Carol Danvers), Wanda Maximoff, and Black Widow
(aka Natasha Romanoff) will have each headlined their own film or series. It
would be tempting to write these characters as powerhouses devoid of com­
plex emotion, but the MCU uses the emotions of each of these three characters
in meaningful ways. An examination of three key scenes highlighting each of
these individuals shows that there has been a significant evolution in the way
that feminine emotion is utilized in the MCU.

Black Widow, Captain Marvel, and Wanda Maximoff

In 2012’s Marvel’s The Avengers (Whedon, 2012), Black Widow’s (Scarlett
Johansson) emotions seem to be triggered in a second act scene where Loki
(Tom Hiddleston) recants her past to the point of her tears. That Loki chooses
this approach demonstrates a sense of interpersonal sexism between he and
Black Widow. Leonard (2021) describes this as one of the benchmarks of this
type of sexism – someone is talked down to solely based on assumptions being
made about them on account of their gender. Loki’s intent in this conversation
is to disrupt Black Widow by using her emotions against her, something he
does not attempt on this same level with the male characters who visit him in
his cell. This selective behavior reveals an inherent bias he has toward her as
more emotionally unsteady than her male teammates and this scene is meant
to provoke a sense of Loki’s victory over Black Widow. But, it is ultimately
played as misdirection when Black Widow reveals that her tears were
a fabrication meant to push Loki to disclosing his plan. Emotions are impor­
tant in this scene, but it could be argued that this importance is primarily
based on their ability to mislead a male character. The expectation of the
audience is subverted when we realize that Loki has not gotten the better of
Black Widow in this exchange, a subversion made possible only because of an
implicit stereotype that women can be manipulated by their emotions.
	In 2019’s Captain Marvel (Boden & Fleck, 2019), Yon-Rogg (Jude Law) tells
the titular character (Brie Larson) that there is nothing more dangerous to
a warrior than emotion during their training sequence at the start of the film.
He admonishes her with this in response to her charging up the energy in her
fist during their sparring match. This idea of emotional suppression is central
in the film, the theme coming to a head in a scene that sees Captain Marvel
remove the inhibitor in her neck while standing her ground against the
Supreme Intelligence (ruler of the Kree): “I’ve been fighting with one arm
tied behind my back, but what happens when I’m finally set free?” (Boden &
Fleck, 2019). When Captain Marvel and Yon-Rogg face-off again at the end of
the film, he once more reminds her that she needs to control her feelings.
Seeing this ploy for what it is, Captain Marvel remarks that she owes him
nothing and Yon-Rogg finds himself blasted into the distance by her full
powers. Emotions here are not used to misdirect a male character but rather
in direct confrontation of and in victory against him.
This evolution in approach to the use of emotions in female characters in
the MCU recently took its next step in WandaVision (Feige et al., 2021).
Where Marvel’s The Avengers (Whedon, 2012) and Captain Marvel (Boden
& Fleck, 2019) both used the concept of feminine emotions in relationship to
deceiving or defeating a male character, WandaVision (Feige et al., 2021) leans
into the power of feminine emotion meant to benefit only the central char­
acter, Wanda Maximoff (Elizabeth Olsen), herself. It does so through
a relentless focus on the process of grieving, made more complicated by the
fact that this particular griever possesses the raw power to resurrect all that she has lost.
	Of any character we have seen on screen in the MCU, Wanda carries the
most complex trauma. In each of her four cinematic appearances to date, we
have witnessed her experience considerable loss. In Avengers: Age of Ultron
(Whedon, 2015), she loses her brother, Pietro (Aaron-Taylor Johnson), in the
final battle. In Captain America: Civil War (Russo & Russo, 2016), she is
responsible for the incident that ultimately leads to the dissolution of The
Avengers. In Avengers: Infinity War (Russo & Russo, 2018), she is forced to kill
her partner, Vision (Paul Bettany), to protect the mind stone, only to see time
reversed by Thanos (Josh Brolin) so that he can be killed in front of her for
a second time mere seconds later. In Avengers: Endgame (Russo & Russo,
2019), she returns from the blip to immediately face Thanos, the one who was
responsible for so much of her trauma in the previous film. This is the weight
of all that Wanda is dealing with leading into WandaVision (Feige et al., 2021),
a six-episode series. It would be enough to break anyone.
	Yet WandaVision (Feige et al., 2021) takes this grief and shows us that this is not weakness, but rather raw, unbridled, intensely powerful strength. Wanda’s grief is powerful enough to create worlds that otherwise would not exist. Her grief pushes her to bend the limits of reality in reshaping the town of Westview to her liking, returning her dead partner (Vision) to life and creating two children for them to raise in her newly constructed reality. This illusion is
a powerful denial of her grief, but she ultimately comes to accept these losses,
letting go of the illusion and returning the town to its normal state after saying
goodbye to her family. This is remarkably different than any other portrayal of
feminine emotion in the MCU because in this instance, Wanda’s emotions are
meant to serve she and she alone. Her exploration of and mastery over the
depths of her grief enable her to rise above efforts to gaslight her as a monster
who stole her partner’s corpse, rejecting a villainous portrayal of her character
and reasserting her status as heroic by the show’s conclusion.
	This intense focus on what Wanda does in her grief speaks to a larger
problem in the MCU. In comparison, none of the male characters are ever
asked to control or reckon with their emotions or the fallout of the decisions
they make as a result of following those feelings reflecting sexism as rooted in
our society. For example, the Hulk (Mark Ruffalo) is responsible for
a considerable amount of property damage in Avengers: Age of Ultron
(Whedon, 2015). Tony Stark’s (Robert Downey Jr.) fear combined with his
outlandish ego are responsible for all of the terrible things that happen in that
movie, yet no one is asked to reckon with any of this until Wanda loses control
during a fight in the opening scenes of Captain America: Civil War (Russo &
Russo, 2016). It is in this same film that we next see Tony Stark after Avengers:
Age of Ultron, where his role in the destruction of Sokovia has now granted
him a seat at the table for creating the Sokovia Accords (regulations designed
to make the future actions of the Avengers subject to government approval).
Stark’s push for his teammates to sign these accords is made imminent by
Wanda’s recent loss of control at the beginning of this same film, but it is the
difference in the way that these two characters are treated that speaks most
directly to this imbalance in the MCU – Tony’s hand in the destruction of
Sokovia has essentially given him a position as a government contractor,
whereas Wanda spends much of the film under house arrest for her (compara­
tively) causing much less damage than Stark was responsible for in her home
nation of Sokovia. Vision, who in this film is tasked with enforcing her house
arrest, even goes so far as to tell her that if she leaves people will never stop
fearing her, reflecting a quasi-gaslighting of her experience in the film up to
that point.

Clinical implications for feminist therapists

These double standards regarding the appropriate expression of emotion are
reinforced by mass entertainment like that offered by the MCU, and it would
be nigh impossible for these ideas not to find their way into our experiences
with clients in the therapy room. If a narrative of emotionality as weakness
prevails, then one of our first steps in creating meaningful change with client
systems may be to reconnect individuals to the experience of their emotions –
not as liability, but as a resource for health, growth, and change. This recon­
necting occurs across several steps in the therapy process, but likely begins
with helping our clients develop an awareness of the cultural forces that shape
their internalized beliefs around the role that emotions should play in their life. After a thorough exploration of these beliefs consistent with the feminist
therapist’s commitment to social change, this helps us to understand our
client’s worldview more fully. From this, we can then turn our attention to
expanding the sense of self to make space for a new narrative that reintegrates
emotion as an integral part of a client’s identity.
	For feminist therapists, recapturing the powerful presence of these emotion will invariably entail pushing back against the cultural (and clinical) processes that make certain “negative” emotions the target of treatment outcomes. This has been a dilemma faced by feminist therapists for decades, as Klein (1976) noted that our “conceptions equating pain with pathology and the removal of pain with therapeutic progress will reinforce traditional stereotypes until they deal with the life circumstances in which symptoms arise” (p. 90). If therapists approach treatment with this kind of symptom reduction in mind without
a consideration of the circumstances that gave birth to the psychological
distress in the first place, we pathologize the victim and cast our lot with the
oppressor. This is true even of our emergent medically assisted responses to
internalized distress, as definitions of depression that lean heavily on
a narrative of chemical imbalance without any discussion of depression as
an understandable response to oppression certainly exert a psychological
impact on those being told that the issue is internal to themselves (Schultz &
Hunter, 2016). For feminist therapists, this push to create social change that
invites the full emotional experience of individuals back to the table remains
a crucial task in our professional work – work that will require us continuing
making use of a strengths-based approach with our clients that places our view
of psychological distress in the appropriate cultural context.
This exploration of cultural context and the role it plays in shaping the
presenting problems of those we work with is one that is crucial to the practice
of responsible and effective therapy. Knudson-Martin et al. (2017) built on the
work of Bateson in advocating for this kind of “third order thinking” as part of
a socioculturally attuned approach to family therapy, one in which context and
power are recognized as powerful components that should be taken seriously
in the therapy process. Furthermore, the focus on deconstructing societal
discourses that characterize narrative family therapy approaches may even
make it irresponsible for us to ignore the prevalence and impact of these
messages from pop culture. Tilsen and Nylund (2016) describe this pairing of
popular culture with narrative therapy as ripe with potential, noting that
“partnering with clients in the deconstruction of media texts and intentional
construction of alternative meanings provides rich soil for the cultivation of
a multiplicity of identity conclusions” (p. 232). If we hope to support clients in developing a narrative that rightly situates their emotions as a source of
strength in their identity, we must be constantly attending to the messages
that discourage (or even pathologize) this narrative in the larger culture.
The steady evolution in the way that feminine emotions get represented in
Marvel’s The Avengers (Whedon, 2012), Captain Marvel (Boden & Fleck,
2019), and WandaVision (Feige et al., 2021) represent steps forward in the
way emotions are conceptualized for these characters. Emotions are beginning
to be seen as a source of strength rather than a weakness to be exploited,
signaling the start of what we should hope as therapists is a more responsible,
less-biased media narrative around feminine emotion. Female characters are
claiming their own stories in this process, no longer relegated to the sidelines
as a supporting cast/team member. What remains to be seen is whether this
trend will continue to a point of equitable representation of male and female
heroes who are celebrated for their physical and emotional strength alike, with
the latter no longer being so unusual among female characters that it bears
discussion in a forum such as this