The Marvel effect: cinematic universes and their impact on box office receipts

ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the effects of cinematic universes in films on box office receipts using data
from 250 films released between 2009 and 2019. Regarding the non-Marvel Cinematic Universes,
there is a statistically significant impact on the opening weekend box office receipts, but the same
is not true with respect to a film‘s initial run. Alternatively, the Marvel Cinematic Universe has
a statistically significant effect on box office receipts over opening weekend and during the film‘s
first run. In addition, female star power remains statistically significant with the inclusion of more
independent variables while male and director star power become statistically insignificant regard­
ing the opening weekend box office receipts.


KEYWORDS

Motion picture industry; boxoffice revenues; consumer
preferences; cinematic
universe; Marvel

I. Introduction

This paper aims to shed light on the effect of cine­
matic universes and star power on opening week­
end and initial-run box office receipts in Canada
and the U.S. The concept of cinematic universes
gained notoriety with the 2008 release of Iron Man
and the creation of the Marvel Cinematic Universe
(MCU).1 The MCU has become a highly profitable
venture for Disney, who acquired Marvel in 2009.
Comprising 23 films, the MCU has grossed
$22.56 billion worldwide (The Numbers). In addi­
tion, there are many other cinematic universes in
existence including: Wizarding World (Harry
Potter), the DC Extended Universe, and the
Warner Bros‘ MonsterVerse among others, which
this paper also examines.
Much of the economic research around film
content as signals of quality and their effect on
box office receipts has revolved around star
power, certain genre tropes, and critical
approval. There has not been much focus on
cinematic universes, but there have been many
studies analyzing the effects of sequels on box
office receipts. A brief literature survey of the
determinants of film revenues is offered in the
Appendix in Table A5.

A great deal of the previous literature concludes
that casting an actor or actress with high star power
increases the total revenue of a film or aids in its
success (De Vany and Walls 1999, 2002; Elberse
2007; Jung and Kim 2010; Nelson and Glotfelty
2012; Kim 2013; Treme and Craig 2013). This is
perhaps because casting popular stars transmits
quality signals from film to potential audiences.
Ravid (1999) finds that actors do not overall affect
the revenue of a film, and a film‘s success depends
solely on budget.
Even though most of the evidence points to stars
influencing box office outcomes, studies have
diverged on how to accurately measure star
power. De Vany and Walls (1999), De Vany and
Walls (2002), and (Elliott and Simmons 2008) use
trade publications‘ top 100 lists from Premiere and
The Hollywood Reporter to gauge star power. Ravid
(1999), Ravid and Basuroy(2004), and (Brewer,
Kelley, and Jozefowicz 2009) use awards won by
actors to access star power, while other studies use
awards won or nominations earned by films as
measurements of their overall quality (Jung and
Kim 2010; Garcia-Del-Barrio and Zarco 2017;
Brewer, Kelley, and Jozefowicz 2009; Ravid 1999;
Ravid and Basuroy 2004).
Alternatively, some studies use the box office
gross of actors as a measurement of star power
with Kim (2013) using a strict average, Garcia-delBarrio and Zarco uses cumulative gross of an
actor‘s films, and Elberse (2007) uses the average
gross of the last five films in which an actor
appeared, which this paper utilizes to measure
star power (Kim 2013; Elberse 2007; Garcia-DelBarrio and Zarco 2017).
Nelson and Glotfelty (2012) uses the IMdB
StarMeter to convey star power and Treme and
Craig (2013) measure star power by counting the
number of a star‘s appearances in People magazine.
Treme and Craig (2013) not only finds that star
power positively influences box office revenues, but
the authors also conclude that the age of stars can
affect the money a film generates at the box office.
Moon, Bergey, and Iacobucci (2010) and Brewer,
Kelley, and Jozefowicz (2009) find that critical
reviews have a positive effect on box office gross,
using Rotten Tomatoes as a source for aggregate
gauges of approval, which this paper also uses as
a measure of a review aggregator.
Regarding ‘built-in‘ audiences, Basuroy and
Chatterjee (2008) and Walls (2009) find that
sequels generate positive returns for films Brewer,
Kelley, and Jozefowicz (2009) finds that movies
that are based on books, video games, or a sequel
have a positive effect on box office numbers.
While studies have addressed the possible bene­
fits of making sequels, not much has been studied
on a broader aspect of the effects of previous audi­
ence recognition, which this paper remedies.
This study attempts to break new ground by
attempting to identify a specific area of audience
recognition by studying the effects of cinematic
universes on box office receipts. Much like all
films, the creation and maintenance of cinematic
universes represents a significant devotion of
resources from film studios, this study attempts to
also identify if the risks involved with cinematic
universes are mitigated with their box office
returns.
In 2019, all ten of the top grossing films in North
America were sequels, remakes, or part of
a cinematic universe. Of the five that belonged to
cinematic universes, three were part of the MCU,
one belonged to the DC Extended Universe, and
another is part of Star Wars.
This paper also examines box office receipts with
respect to Opening Weekend and Domestic Gross.
Films can make up to one third of their total gross
over their opening weekend, meaning that
a successful opening can almost guarantee a profit
for a film.
Cinematic universes can also have a dedicated
fanbase, and looking at the impact of cinematic
universes can also help film studios determine
how reliable a fan base can be during the precarious
opening days.
This study finds that the MCU has a significant
impact on film revenue over both opening weekend
and over the entirety of a film‘s run. This study
does not find that Cinematic Universes outside of
Marvel have an impact over a full theatrical run,
but they do increase revenues over opening
weekends.
Regarding the organization of this paper,
Section 2 presents the theoretical model and data,
Section III presents and analyzes the empirical
results, Section IV regards Limitations and
Directions for Future Research, and Section
V concludes.

II. Theoretical model and data

Along the lines of (Garcia-Del-Barrio and Zarco
2017), (De Vany and Walls 1999; Antipov and
Pokryshevskaya 2016)Rousseeuw and Leroy
(2005), this paper uses robust regressions in order
to estimate the empirical results presented in
Section III. Robust regressions are able to (i.) han­
dle outliers by down-weighting them through the
use of Huber‘s M-estimators and Cook‘s Distance;
(ii.) handle data with fat tails typically found in
financial time series such as box office receipts;
and (iii.) produce robust standard errors, which
are able to take into account heterskedasticity
(Antipov and Pokryshevskaya 2016; Elliott and
Simmons 2008; Rousseeuw and Leroy 2003;
Verardi and Croux 2009; Walls 2005a, 2005b).
Regarding the data, this paper uses data pertaining
to the top 25 highest grossing domestic releases in the
United States and Canada from 2009 to 2019, which
results in a data set with 250 observations. Table 1
presents a summary of the dependent and indepen­
dent variables that are used in the robust regressions,
and Table 2 contains the descriptive statistics for all
the aforementioned variables. The data is obtained
from two main websites: The Numbers and from Box
Office Mojo as compiled on IMDbPro.2
The two dependent variables, which are domes­
tic gross box office and the domestic gross for the
opening weekend, are obtained from The Numbers,
and are denoted respectively as Dom Gross and
Dom Weekend. Two of the independent variables:
movie budget and the number of movie theaters
are also obtained from The Numbers and are
denoted respectively as Budget, and Max Theaters.
All remaining independent variables are
obtained from Box Office Mojo as compiled on
IMDbPro.com, which relate to the star power of
the lead male star, lead female star, and director.
These variables are designated, respectively, as
male star power, female star power, and director
star power. The measure of star power for each
category is obtained by taking the average domestic
gross of the last five projects in which an actor,
actress, or director appeared before appearing in
the observed film as inspired by Elberse (2007).
In order to take into account the critical acclaim
of a movie, the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes‘
website is used and is denoted as Rotten Tomatoes
in Table 1.4 The website assigns each film
a ‘tomatometer‘ score based on critical approval
and is synthesized as a percentage that ranges
from 0% to 100%. If a film receives a 60% or
above it is considered ‘fresh‘, meaning it is
a critically approved movie and that a majority of
the film‘s reviews are positive. If a film receives
a score of 59% or below it is considered ‘rotten,‘
and not of critical merit. Rotten Tomatoes is
included to see if critical merit boosts ticket sales.
In addition, this paper is interested in studying
the effects that a ‘built-in‘ audience has on box
office returns, which are denoted as the dummy
variables. Movies with a ‘built-in‘ audience have
an established fan base, which could possibly fuel
ticket sales. The broadest dummy variable, which is
denoted as prev aud, captures sequels, prequels,
and remakes as well as cinematic universes, which
is used in Model 7 in Section III. There are 128
movies in the dummy variable, prev aud.
It is important to include cinematic universes
since they have a unique ‘built-in‘ audience that
are supposed to generate ticket sales, which this
paper tests. Movies with cinematic universes share
a common continuity as well as characters, but they
are not necessarily sequels of each other.
Generally, if a movie produces a spinoff, then
these movies are counted as part of a shared cine­
matic universe, however there are exceptions to
this rule such as the Tarantinoverse.5Aquaman,
Wonder Woman, and Suicide Squad are examples
of films that are designated as part of a cinematic
universe. Cinematic universes, that have had
releases in this time period, are Marvel Cinematic
Universe (MCU), the DC Cinematic Universe (DC
Comics), James Bond, Star Wars, the Wizarding
World (Harry Potter and Fantastic Beasts),
Transformers, Despicable Me, Tarantinoverse, the
MonsterVerse (Godzilla, King Kong), GhostCorps
(Ghostbusters), and the Alien Franchise.
To capture the effect that the various cinematic
universes have had on domestic box office and
opening weekend receipts, the dummy variable,
Cinematic Universe, is used in Model 8 in Section
III. In order to avoid overlapping or doublecounting, the dummy variable, prev aud, is parti­
tioned into prev aud 2 and Cinematic Universe All
where prev aud 2 contains only the sequels, pre­
quels, and remakes. In total, there are seventy-eight
cinematic universe films.
Of all the cinematic universes, the MCU has
been a juggernaut when it comes to ticket sales.
The MCU includes movies such as The Avengers,
Captain America: The Winter Soldier, Black
Panther, etc. There are twenty-one movies, specifi­
cally, belonging to the MCU. The dummy variable,
Cinematic Universe 2 denotes the variable
Cinematic Universe less the movies of the MCU,
which is found in Model 9.
A summary of the different dummy variables
used to capture ‘built-in‘ audiences is provided in
Diagram A1 in the Appendix. Model 7 contains
prev aud, which includes sequels, prequels,
remakes, and cinematic universes. Model 8 sepa­
rates prev aud into prev aud 2 and cinematic uni­
verses with prev aud 2 equaling (prev aud –
cinematic universes). Model 9 partitions the ‘built-
in‘ audiences into prev aud 2 and cinematic uni­-
verses into a dummy variable containing only
MCU movies, called Marvel, and another without
the MCU, which is denoted as Cinematic
Universe 2.

III. Empirical results

To study the determinants of film revenues, this
paper estimates 9 robust regressions for each of the
two dependent variables: Domestic Weekend and
Domestic Gross. Domestic Weekend and Domestic
Gross Hence, 18 regressions in total are used in
determining the impact of certain control variables
on the opening weekend box office totals (Domestic
Weekend) and total box office receipts (Domestic
Gross). Tables 3 and 4 present all the estimated
robust regression results.
Each new model represents the inclusion of an
additional explanatory variable for each of the
dependent variables, with Model 1 being the most
parsimonious by having one explanatory variable
and Model 9 being the most inclusive with nine
explanatory variables. The regressions are con­
ducted in such a manner as to see the gradual
effects that each individual variable has on each
regressand. Each of the regressands, Domestic
Weekend and Domestic Gross, are regressed on
the same explanatory variables that are identified
in Models 1 to 9, which are discussed in SubSections 3.1 and 3.2 respectively.
A correlation matrix of the non-dummy vari­
ables is provided in Table A6 in the Appendix.
There appears to be no issue with collinearity
amongst these explanatory variables, with all show­
ing a positive correlation amongst each other,
except Rotten Tomatoes and Budget and Rotten
Tomatoes and Director Star Power, which are nega­
tively correlated.7 The largest correlation is
between the variables, Budget and Max Theaters,
with a magnitude of 0.601. Typically, big budget
movies will run in more theaters and vice versa,
which explains the higher correlation. The smallest
correlation is between Rotten Tomatoes and
Director Star Power with a magnitude of −0.017.
Hence, the empirical results do not appear to be
driven by collinearity.

Opening weekend (Domestic weekend)

The empirical results with the opening weekend
receipts are contained in Table 3. Models 1 through
3 display the effects of Domestic Weekend on Male
Star Power, Female Star power, Director Star Power.
Across all three models, each star power variable is
found to be positive and statistically significant at
the 5% significance level. Model 1 contains the
regression Domestic Weekend on Male Star
Power, with the results showing that a $1 million
increase in male star power results in a $178,000
increase in the opening weekend haul of a film.

Model 2 regresses Opening Weekend on Male
Star Power and Female Star Power, showing a ­
$1 million increase in both male and female star
power results in a $151,000 and $192,000 increase
in opening weekend revenue, respectively. Model 3
adds the variable Director Star Power to the regres­
sion. This addition affects the regression in such
a way that an increase of $1 million in male, female,
and director star power results in a $158,000,
$166,000, and $58,000 increase in opening week­
end returns, respectively.
While building upon the 3 star power variables,
Models 4 through 6 continue to add variables that
could possibly contribute to the success of a film.
These variables are Max Theaters, Budget, and
Rotten Tomatoes, which each being added one at
a time over three models.
With the addition of Max Theaters to Model
4, both Male Star Power and Director Star Power
become no longer statistically significant, and
Female Star Power decreases in impact by
approximately a half. Max Theaters is also sta­
tistically significant and positive at the 1% sig­
nificance level. The addition of 1 theater to
a film‘s release adds $47,706.98 to a film‘s open­
ing weekend gross.
Model 5 adds the variable, Budget to the
regression. With this addition, male and director
star power remain statistically insignificant as it
is in Model 4, but Female Star Power slightly
increases in impact to the opening weekend
gross.
Max Theaters remains significant at the 1% sig­
nificance level, but its impact is lessened. Budget is
also positive and significant at the 1% level, show­
ing a $1 million increase in budget increases open­
ing weekend gross by $154,000.
Model 6 adds the variable Rotten Tomatoes,
which is not statistically significant from this
model forward. This indicates that movie reviews
might not be a major factor for movie-goers in
terms of the choice of a movie during opening
weekend. The coefficient of the variable Female
Star Power does not change with the addition of
Rotten Tomatoes, while both Director Star Power
and Male Star Power continue to not be statistically
significant.
Models 7 to 9 add variables relating to existing
properties, meaning films based on previously
released media. These variables are PrevAud,
Cinematic Universe (CU), and Marvel. Model 7
adds the variable PrevAud, which is not statistically
significant, but it does cause adjustments in the
magnitudes of the estimated coefficients of the
statistically significant variables.
Model 8 introduces the variable, Cinematic
Universe (with Marvel) to the regression. Cinematic
Universe is found to be positive and statistically sig­
nificant at the 1% significance level. If the film belongs
to a cinematic universe, an additional $21,300,000 is
expected to be added to the domestic weekend gross.
The addition of Cinematic Universe (with Marvel)
also adjusts the magnitudes of the statistically signifi­
cant variables in the model with Female Star Power
slightly increasing and Max Theaters, and Budget
slightly decreasing. Prev Aud 2 (without CU &

4891

Marvel, which replaces Prev Aud, is statistically insig­
nificant from hence forth. It is interesting to note that
the sign of Rotten Tomatoes becomes negative from
this model forward, and it still remains statistically
insignificant at the 5% significance level.
Model 9 introduces the dummy variable Marvel,
which denotes whether a film belongs to the Marvel
Cinematic Universe (MCU). The model estimates
that if a film belongs to the MCU its opening week­
end haul increases by $46,400,000. Marvel is also
positive and statistically significant at the 1% sig­
nificance level.
Female Star Power, Max Theaters, Budget, and
Cinematic Universe 2 (without Marvel) are positive
and statistically significant at the 1% significance
level. The estimated coefficient belonging to Female
Star Power increases slightly to $106,000 per
$1 million added to star power while the estimated
coefficients of Max Theaters and Budget slightly
decrease in magnitude. Regarding the estimated
coefficient of Cinematic Universe 2 (without
Marvel), it decreases by $4,400,000 once Marvel is
removed. Hence, being a part of a cinematic uni­
verse such as DC or Marvel is beneficial for the box
office receipts of the opening weekend.
It should be noted that the adjusted R-Squared
increases with the inclusion of each explanatory
variable. In Model 1, the adjusted R-Squared term
is 0.11, and Model 9 has the highest adjusted
R-Squared term of 0.529.

Total box office receipts (Domestic gross)

The empirical results for total box office receipts
are contained in Table 4. Each model follows the
same pattern as the opening weekend models, with
Models 1 to 3 containing star power variables,
Models 4 to 6 containing various explanatory vari­
ables that could explain box office receipts such as
critical acclaim, budget, and the number of movie
theaters showing the movie, and Models 7 to 9
containing variables related to established audi­
ences and cinematic universes.
Model 1 regresses Domestic Gross on Male Star
Power, and the estimated results are positive and
statistically significant at the 1% significance level.
The model estimates that $513,000 is added to domes­
tic gross per $1 million increase in male star power.
Female Star Power is added to Model 2 along
with Male Star Power. Both variables are positive
and statistically significant at the 1% significance
level, Male Star Power slightly decreases to
$429,000 and Female Star Power adds $346,000 to
domestic box office gross per $1 million increase in
each star power.
Model 3 regresses Domestic Gross on Male Star
Power, Female Star Power and Director Star Power.
All 3 variables are found to be positive and statis­
tically significant at the 1% significance level.
Model 4 includes Max Theaters to the regres­
sion. All variables remain positive and significant at
the 1% significance level except for Director Star
Power, which is not statistically significant from
this model forward. The estimated coefficients
belonging to Male Star Power and Female Star
Power slightly decrease in magnitude. Max
Theaters is estimated to add $88,584.31 to domestic
gross per additional theater.
The variable, Budget is added to Model 5, which
unsurprisingly, causes adjustments in the estimated
magnitudes of the previously added variables. All
variables save for Director Star Power remain posi­
tive and statistically significant. The estimated coef­
ficients of Male Star Power, Female Star Power, and
Max Theaters slightly decrease in magnitude.
Budget is estimated to add $224,000 to Domestic
gross per $1 million increase in budget.
Model 6 adds the variable, Rotten Tomatoes to the
regression. Like Model 5, all of the variables except
Director Star Power are statistically significant and
positive at the 1% significance level. Male Star
Power, Female Star Power, and Budget slightly
increase in impact while the estimated coefficient of
Max Theaters slightly decreases in magnitude. The
variable Rotten Tomatoes is estimated to add
$792,861.2 per 1% increase in the ‘Tomatometer‘
score.
Model 7 regresses all previous explanatory vari­
ables as well as PrevAud. All of the variables are
estimated to be positive and statistically significant
at the 1% significance level except for Director Star
Power and PrevAud, which are statistically insignif­
icant at the 5% significance level. The estimated
coefficient of PrevAud is negative, which differs
from the regression where Domestic Weekend is
the regressand. All of the statistically significant

4893

estimated coefficients slightly increase in magni­
tude with the exception of Rotten Tomatoes,
which decreases in magnitude by approximately
$40,000.
Model 8 includes the variable, Cinematic
Universe (with Marvel) into the regression, and it
is statistically insignificant as is Prev Aud 2 (without
CU & Marvel), which replaces prev aud from
model 7. Of the statistically significant variables,
Male Star Power, Max Theaters, and Budget, the
estimated coefficients slightly decrease in magni­
tude when compared to Model 7. The estimated
coefficients of Female Star Power and Rotten
Tomatoes slightly increase in magnitude.Finally,
Model 9 adds the variable, Marvel to the regression,
which is statistically significant at the 5% signifi­
cance level. It is estimated to add $42,800,000 to
a film‘s domestic gross. Director Star Power, Prev
Aud 2 (without CU & Marvel), and Cinematic
Universe 2 (without Marvel) are statistically insig­
nificant. For the first time, Budget is statistically
insignificant at the 5% significance level with
respect to the regressions where Domestic Gross is
the regressand. The estimated coefficients of all the
remaining statistically significant variables, which
are Male Star Power, Female Star Power, Max
Theaters, and Rotten Tomatoes slightly decrease in
magnitude.
Regarding the adjusted R-Squared terms, the
pattern is slightly different with respect to
Domestic Gross when compared to the regressions
involving Domestic Weekend. The model with the
smallest adjusted R-Squared is in Model 1 with
0.155. The model with the largest adjusted
R-Squared is in Model 7 with 0.435, but Model 9
is a very close second with an adjusted R-Squared
of 0.434.
Unlike many previous studies, both the opening
weekend and domestic gross models do not find
that director star power is statistically significant.
This change may be due to directors having lost
prestige in the last ten years compared previous
decades before and hence, are no longer a major
box office draw.
The variable prev aud is also not significant in
either model, meaning a wider definition of film
continuity does not guarantee a good showing at
the box office. These results suggest that the actor
star power, critical approval, budget, and the num­
ber of theaters are the main contributing factors to
a film‘s success. It appears that director star power,
being a sequel, remake, or being part of a nonmarvel cinematic universe do not contribute to
a film‘s box office gross over its total theatrical run.
An explanation for the lack of sequel and remake
success could be that, typically, sequels earn less
money than their predecessors and yet are almost
always more expensive to produce. It seems studios
still produce sequels because sequels appear to be
less risky in terms of presupposing that a good
percentage of viewers of the first movie of the
franchise will come for the sequel, but this does
not seem to be the case. In the Domestic Gross
model both PrevAud and PrevAud 2 have negative
slope estimates, which seems to confirm at least
some of the empirical evidence surrounding
sequels (Snow 2016). However, because both esti­
mates are not significant it is difficult to determine
if previous audience recognition truly has
a negative effect.
Adding to the empirical evidence, sequels are
also less critically acclaimed than their predecessors
and typically do worse at the box office (Basuroy
and Chatterjee 2008). So, movie-goers might shy
away from a lower rated movie in favor of a more
highly rated one. The findings for Cinematic
Universe seem to also confirm that previous audi­
ence recognition does not automatically guarantee
box office success.
These findings are contrasted by the MCU,
which contains movies that are part of
a cinematic universe and some that are also sequels
of each other. It seems that audiences see belonging
to the MCU as a signal of a film‘s quality, and are
eager to see the franchise develop. MCU movies are
also critical successes, further adding to audiences‘
perception of their quality. Every MCU film
released so far has a ‘fresh rating‘ on Rotten
Tomatoes. There is also the possibility that audi­
ences have a previous affection for the various
characters of Marvel Comics, meaning that filmgoers are eager to see superheroes leap from paper
onto the silver screen.
These results show that audiences over the open­
ing weekend can have different attitudes than audi­
ences over the entirety of the movie‘s initial run. It
appears that female star power is the only star

power factor that matters to opening weekend
audiences, which mirrors the findings of De Vany
and Walls (1999), who find that women are the
biggest star power draw to films as well.
A movie‘s budget appears to be an important
indicator of movie choice for opening weekend
audiences and for the first run of a movie with
the exception of the findings in Model 9 where
Domestic Gross is the regressand. For both opening
weekend and for the movie‘s run, a big budget
could be indicative of better quality for the audi­
ence and be more worthwhile to view the movie in
a movie theater,
The biggest contrast between the two models
appears to be Rotten Tomatoes. A logical explana­
tion for this discrepancy could be that opening
weekend audiences are typically more excited for
a film‘s release than the average moviegoer, and
because of this, they are most likely not affected
by critical approval.
Regarding cinematic universes, the opening
weekend model finds that cinematic universes do
positively contribute to a movie‘s opening weekend
gross. As mentioned above, opening weekend audi­
ences are more likely to be more excited for a film‘s
release, and fans could rush to see their favorite
characters on screen as soon as they can and to
avoid spoilers.
Batman V Superman: Dawn of Justice almost
perfectly reflects these phenomena. It belongs to
a cinematic universe, has only 28% approval on
Rotten Tomatoes, and large female star power in
Amy Adams and Gal Gadot. Batman V Superman
certainly had a successful opening weekend but
underperformed during the rest of its run. The
film ultimately made over 50% of its lifetime gross
just during its opening weekend, which is quite
higher than the 30% average of all of the films in
the sample. It appears that DC Extended Universe
fans are excited for the film, and they saw it quickly,
but later audiences were not as eager.

IV. Limitations and directions for future
research

This section addresses possible limitations of
this study and certain areas of focus for future
research. One area of possible limitations of this
study involves the measures of both merit and
star power. Previous studies on star power have
used varying measures of an actor‘s notoriety
such as award wins and nominations, IMDb
StarMeter, average box office gross, and appear­
ances in celebrity news and Hollywood trade
publications.
This study mirrors Elberse (2007) in choosing to
measure box office success by taking the average gross
of an actor and actress‘ previous five films.8 There are
several reasons as to why this measure of star power
was chosen. The average gross of the last five movies
adjusts for possible changes in audience preferences
and captures the instantaneous command an actor or
actress has over the box office. Alternatively, a simple
average of a star‘s lifetime box office gross may over­
state how powerful a star may be.
Furthermore, many trade publications such as
Premiere no longer exist, meaning that there are not
up to date lists of powerful actors in Hollywood.
Appearances in celebrity news magazines no longer
remain a reliable measure of popularity nor do they
capture the breadth of stars in the top 100 grossing
movies. It is unknown how the IMDb STARmeter is
calculated, and it cannot be determined how popular
a star was before a certain film was released. Finally,
because only a limited number of actors can be
nominated or receive awards, more stars will not
receive an award or nomination than those who
will. This means that many popular actresses and
actors would be glossed over if such a measure were
used to gauge star power.
Measuring critical approval is limited for simi­
lar reasons as star power. Much of the literature
uses award nominations and wins to measure
critical approval. In the 20th century, review
aggregators such as Rotten Tomatoes and
Metacritic did not exist, meaning that it was diffi­
cult to gauge overall critical approval of a film
before the year 2000. Using awards as a measure
of critical approval also comes with certain pit­
falls. Many awards are not decided upon by
critics, rather they are awarded by industry insi­
ders. This means that awards are imprecise mea­
sures of critical approval and its effect on box
office releases. Awards are also typically awarded
after a film has lapsed out of release, meaning that
most movie goers have already seen a film before
it is rewarded. In a few rare instances, a movie
might be released after the Oscars, but this might
skew the results. On the other hand, Rotten
Tomatoes is more contemporaneously available
to the movie goer, and it has proven itself quite
popular among movie goers and hence, has been
used in previous empirical studies measuring the
effects of critical success such as Moon, Bergey,
and Iacobucci (2010).”
In terms of future research, there are still ques­
tions to be explored in terms of consumer behavior
especially with the two dependent variables, Dom
Weekend, which refers to the opening weekend box
office receipts, and Dom Gross, which refers to the
entire box office receipts earned in the U.S. The two
dependent variables could be capturing different
market segments, which could be a part of future
research. For instance, Dom Weekend could be
capturing the die-hard fans while Dom Gross
could be capturing the effect of critical acclaim or
word of mouth, which could lead to the need for
different marketing approaches.
As has been previously stated, it is evident that
certain market segments respond to film content
differently. Further research could specifically mea­
sure the magnitude of certain properties or char­
acters (Audience response to X-Men compared to
Iron Man), could the effect of the MCU‘s box office
draw be tied to certain characters rather than the
cinematic universe as a whole? Another focus could
be on word of mouth, both local and electronic.
Much emphasis has been placed on movie trailer
premiers and press announcements, could there be
a way to empirical measure the excitement gener­
ated by this buzz-inducing instrumental variables
and measure their effect on box office returns?
Electronic word of mouth and social media could
also be applied to star power. Do more social media
followers truly translate into box office success and
do consumers use social media influence as a gauge
of quality?

V. Conclusion

The success of the MCU has spurred the creation of
more cinematic universes. These universes are
a significant investment for movie studios as they
require the coordination of stories, budgets, wri­
ters, and actors over many years. It is important to
investigate if the risks involved in creating cine­
matic universes are matched with the tastes of
movie-goers.
Using robust regression in 18 separate models,
this paper finds that over opening weekends, cine­
matic universes (both non-MCU and MCU),
increase box office receipts. If a film belongs to
the MCU, its affiliation with this specific cinematic
universe corresponds with higher box office
receipts over a film‘s entire theatrical run as well.
Regarding Non-MCU cinematic universes, it is
possible that enthusiastic fans of these cinematic
universes rush to see a film when it is first released,
which is one possible explanation of the statistically
significant results of the opening box office
receipts. This may also demonstrate evidence that
different market segments respond to a film‘s
release differently. Fans of recognizable characters
and franchises may disregard word-of-mouth and
critical approval in order to see their favorite cine­
matic universes on screen as soon as possible.
People who place more importance on critical
approval and word of mouth (both local and elec­
tronic) than their devotion to a certain property
may wait until after opening weekend in order to
fully gauge popular and critical response.
This paper also yielded interesting results from
its independent variables. The two dependent vari­
ables present stark contrasts at times which provide
insights into audience behavior. Domestic Gross and
Opening Weekend yielded different results based on
critical approval, budget, and male star power.
In the Domestic Gross model, the Rotten
Tomatoes Tomatometer score is found to impact
box office receipts, however, in the Opening
Weekend model Rotten Tomatoes is found to be
statistically insignificant. From these results, it
appears that movie-goers, attending a film in its
opening days, do not place much importance on
critical approval, possibly opting to see a film
because its budget or its association with
a particular cinematic universe. This is contrasted
with Domestic Gross models, which finds that critical
approval is a significant factor to a film‘s success.
Furthermore, the models find a difference
among the dependent variables when assessing
the impact of male star power. It appears that the
only star power variable that seem to sway opening
weekend audiences is female star power. The lack
of male influence is also mirrored in De Vany and
Walls (1999), which finds that the most powerful
stars are female and the biggest box office draws.
Audiences, who attend films after opening week­
end are influenced by both male and female star
power.
Lastly, this study finds that director star power
neither influences audiences during opening week­
end nor over a film‘s entire theatrical run, which
rapidly losing significance as the models with the
introduction of more explanatory variables. While
audiences in the past have been found to be quite
influenced by directors, this study finds that, at
least in the most recent decade directors are not
a surefire box office draw.