‘I am Iron Man’: the Marvel Cinematic Universe and celeactor labour

This article analyses why assertions of superheroic identity, textually privileged yet
seemingly redundant, occur during the climatic moments of the Marvel Cinematic
Universe origin story films, and why producers often cast lesser-known actors as leads
in them. Drawing upon the fields of celebrity studies and media industry studies, this
paper considers these two questions to be interlinked, and accordingly proposes a twopart answer to them. It first considers what these non-A list stars bring to superhero
origin movies with regards to existing economic value, degree of fame, and star
trajectory. It thus reads the casting of lesser-known stars as leads in the Marvel
Cinematic Universe as a canny strategy by Marvel Studios to manage paratextual star
narratives and trajectories, the verisimilitude of the onscreen fantasy, and the studio’s
present and future bargaining leverage. Subsequently, this paper argues that this combination of producer strategies is an updating of the oneiric climate that Umberto Eco has
compellingly argued to be a structural necessity for texts which operate within the
superhero metagenre. These combined strategies are read as treating the superhero as a
postmodern star, asserting the primacy of the character – as opposed to the actor – as the
primary attraction for the present and future audiences of these franchises.

Keywords: superheroes; celeactor; oneiric climate; blockbuster franchise

Introduction

The cinema is truth 24 times per second. (La Petit Soldat 1963)
‘The truth is … I am Iron Man.’ At the very end of Iron Man (2008), Robert Downey Jr’s
Tony Stark announces his superhero identity to an assembled press corps, who gawk and
then click their cameras frenziedly. ‘I’m Captain America’, states Chris Evans’ Steve
Rogers dramatically to freed prisoners of war while portentously heroic music swells in
the background of a scene from Captain America: The First Avenger (2011) ‘You’re not
G[overnment]-Men. You’re more like … X-Men.’ The X-Men are only named as such in
the closing scenes of X-Men: First Class (2011), where the female lead opines on the
ultimate allegiance of the extralegal superhero team led by James McAvoy’s Professor X:
Whosoever holds this hammer, if he be worthy, shall possess the power of Thor’. Spoken
with affected intonation and inflection by the All-Father of the gods, this line
in Thor (2011) accompanies the return of its titular protagonist’s – as played by Chris
Hemsworth – mighty hammer to him; Thor cheats death as a result, and the camera pans
around to show audiences that his powers and principalities are being resoundingly
returned to him.
There is a trend towards such textually privileged assertions of superheroic identity
occurring during the climatic moments of superhero origin movies, especially those set in
the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). This MCU, which began with Iron Man in mid2008, is a string of financially successful, narratively-connected blockbuster movies that
showcases the origins and subsequent adventures of Marvel Studios’ superhero characters
such as Thor, Iron Man, and Captain America, and the superhero team The Avengers.1 As
of December 2013, the MCU is one of the highest-grossing film franchises ever with over
US$5.6 billion in tickets sold across its eight films. Further entries, such as Guardians of
the Galaxy (2014) and Ant-Man (2015) are planned.
Marvel, further, tends to cast lesser-known actors, as opposed to A-list stars – or
widely-recognised ones – who can carry a big-budget blockbuster film based on their
name value alone, as the leads in these superhero origin movies. Robert Downey Jr was a
big name before Iron Man, but Chris Evans and Chris Hemsworth were not when they
first starred in Captain America and Thor. Guardians and Ant-Man are slated to star Chris
Pratt and Paul Rudd respectively, who as of December 2013 are not marquee names either.
This is a marked shift compared with the few superhero franchises that were produced
during the 1990s and the turn of the millennium. Where Hugh Jackman and Tobey
Maguire similarly were not Hollywood A-list material when they first starred in the
profitable X-Men and Spider-Man film franchises, Wesley Snipes was already a household name when he accepted the title role in Blade (1998) as were the three different
actors – Michael Keaton, Val Kilmer, and George Clooney – who played Batman in the
1990s tetralogy.
This article analyses why these assertions of superheroic identity, textually privileged
yet seemingly redundant, occur during the climatic moments of the MCU origin story
films, and why producers often cast little-known actors as leads in it. Drawing upon the
fields of celebrity studies and media industry studies, this paper considers these two
questions to be interlinked, and accordingly proposes a two-part answer to them.
The paper first considers what these non-A list stars bring to superhero origin movies
with regards to existing economic value, degree of fame, and star trajectory. It thus reads
the casting of lesser-known stars as leads in the MCU as a canny strategy by Marvel
Studios to manage paratextual star narratives and trajectories, the verisimilitude of the
onscreen fantasy, and the studio’s present and future bargaining leverage. Subsequently,
this paper argues that this combination of producer strategies is an updating of the oneiric
climate that Umberto Eco has compellingly argued to be a structural necessity for texts
which operate within the superhero metagenre. These combined strategies are read as
treating the superhero as a postmodern star, asserting the primacy of the character – as
opposed to the actor – as the primary attraction for the present and future audiences of
these franchises.

Casting the lesser-known star
The casting of a specific actor for a specific character involves producers considering
what this particular actor brings to the character in terms of existing economic value,
degree of fame, star trajectory, and idiolect. As Richard Dyer has argued, film stars
implicitly bring their own paratextual star narratives to the films that they star in,
‘signify[ing] in [these] films by virtue of being an already-signifying image’ (1979,
p. 88) which is comprised from various ‘media texts that can be [variously categorised]
as promotion, publicity, films, criticism, and commentaries’ (1979, p. 60). The construction of a film character, for Dyer, is highly predicated upon the foreknowledge of audiences, for ‘we expect John Wayne to play a certain kind of character’ (1979, p. 109)
and accordingly read his character in a currently unfolding text against previous texts that
also involve his star image. Similarly, Justin Wyatt notes in his analysis of pre-millennial
blockbuster movies that ‘perhaps the most significant pre-sold property from a commercial standpoint is the human capital, the star, which is attached to a project’ (1994, p. 31)
so much so that Hollywood producers find that ‘the hardest kind of film to sell is a film
that has no marketable cast’ (1994, p. 129). He further sees the star’s image as a multifaceted tool, strategically promotable by producers such that it can be recuperated within
the film text (Wyatt 1994, p. 31).
Thomas Austin’s book chapter about ‘Men in Suits’ is accordingly pertinent here.
Austin’s chapter considers the different valences that the three different star-actors brought
to each of their portrayals of Batman in the quadrology of blockbuster movies featuring
the superhero during the 1990s (which were direct precursors to the current crop of
postmillennial superhero movies). Austin finds that while introductory scenes in the
quadrology’s later two movies had its actors literally taking on the role of Batman by
dramatically donning the Batman costume, ‘the precise way in which each star-actor
inhabits the Batsuit depends upon a combination of the character-role, a star persona in
process, and performance techniques grounded in the particular actor’s body and voice …
[and] cinematic codes’ (2003, p. 135). He also records that when each Batman movie was
released, ‘efforts [were] made through promotion and publicity to blend star and character
into a successful (that is, “convincing”) alloy’ (2003, p. 136).
The conceits and concerns of films, then, have historically been personified by their
lead star(s), and by whichever public triumphs and failings this star may have. Further, in
Austin’s analysis, one sees the Batman tetralogy’s producers operating according to the
pre-millennial commercial, rather circular, logic of the star promotion system that Wyatt
identifies: Batman is the subject of a blockbuster movie, and as such needs an A-list star
to portray him. Where the MCU is concerned, thus, Robert Downey Jr’s well-documented
playboy lifestyle and stints in drug rehab made him an excellent fit for the role of Iron
Man’s civilian alter-ego, the similarlyfreewheeling genius industrialist Tony Stark. Stark’s
defining vincibility in the comics has been, since 1979’s Iron Man: Demon in a
Bottle storyline (Michelinie and Layton 1979), to alcohol abuse. This character flaw is
brought up even in recent stories like 2011’s Invincible Iron Man #506 (Fraction and
Larocca 2011), where Stark sacrifices his precious sobriety so as to forge holy weapons
that will empower superheroes to smite an unholy giant serpent. Downey Jr followed up
his Oscar-nominated turn as the lead of Chaplin (1992) with numerous arrests on drugsrelated charges, which contributed to a long-term career slump. All these incidents, when
combined with Downey Jr’s mid-2000s nascent career revival with his roles in the
modestly-budgeted and modestly-performing Kiss Kiss Bang Bang (2005) and A
Scanner Darkly (2006), made his casting as an iteration of a character defined as much
by mastery of his craft as by a determined ongoing recovery from serious substance abuse
problems thus eminently readable as Marvel banking on these parallels to, as Austin
would write, forge a convincingly authentic alloy between Downey Jr’s star image and
Iron Man’s character history.
However, Downey Jr’s A-list status and lengthy pre-existing star narrative make him
an exception in the MCU, and in the minority when considering postmillennial comicbook superhero origin movies in general. These movies tend towards featuring lesser
known to virtually unknown actors in their lead roles. Where there have been 15 origin
movies for Marvel superheroes since the millennium, only three – Iron
Man, Daredevil (2003), and Ghost Rider (2007) – have featured A-list leads (Robert Downey Jr, Ben Affleck, and Nicholas Cage respectively), and Ghost
Rider and Daredevil are not part of the MCU. Marvel’s traditional rival, DC Comics,
has in the same period been associated with nine origin movies, of which five had A-list
leads: Halle Berry for Catwoman (2004), Keanu Reeves for Constantine (2005), Christian
Bale for Batman Begins (2005), Sean Connery for League of Extraordinary
Gentlemen (2003), and Ryan Reynolds for Green Lantern (2011).
By contrast, Chris Hemsworth’s main claims to fame, prior to Thor, consisted of
playing Captain Kirk’s father in the opening scenes of Star Trek (2009), and the role of the
high-school dropout Kim Hyde on the Australian ensemble soap opera Home and
Away (1988–) intermittently between 2004 and 2007. Before becoming Captain
America, the highest-profile projects on Chris Evans’ dossier were supporting roles
on Fantastic Four (2005) and Fantastic Four: Rise of the Silver Surfer (2007) as the
superhero The Human Torch. Both of these movies were badly reviewed, rating 27% and
37% respectively at popular review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes. After the
two Fantastic Four movies, however, Evans became known among comic fandom for
his roles in The Losers (2010) and Scott Pilgrim vs. the World (2010), where he played
cocky smart-alecks similar in personality to The Human Torch. There was a miscast here,
then, in terms of Evans’ existing star persona, since Captain America is characterised as a
staid, straight-arrow patriot who loves his country more than he does himself. As the
movie iteration of the character explains his four prior attempts to be recruited into the
Allied army against Adolf Hitler, ‘There are men laying down their lives. I got no right to
do any less than them … This isn’t about me.’ While James McAvoy, who plays the
young Professor X in X-Men: First Class has a long stage resumé, and was the romantic
lead in the commercially and critically successful Atonement (2007), his other starring role
in the arthouse The Last King of Scotland (2006) was accompanied by a limited American
release of the film, which eventually only grossed US$48 million worldwide. His other
major role, that of the faun Mr Tumnus in Walden Media’s blockbuster The Lion, the
Witch, and the Wardrobe (2005), had him as a quasi-human supporting character obscured
under a fake nose, fake hair, and remote-controlled fake ears. McAvoy’s name, further,
was not on any of the movie posters that Walden Media distributed. Any paratextual star
narratives that these actors would have brought to their superhero movies would have, at
best, been minimal or contradictory.
With this lack of star narrative, it is tempting to read these origin story movies as
postmillennial articulations of the bildungsroman, where a character grows to socially
sanctioned maturity, and as Wilhelm Dithley’s classical definition finds: ‘the dissonances
and conflicts of life appear as the necessary transit points of the individual to maturity and
harmony’ (translated in Tennyson 1968, p. 136). The rise of the superhero character to
superheroism offers a neat parallel to the rise of a lesser-known actor’s star trajectory from
relative obscurity to starring in a big-budget movie and resultingly having a high-profile
media presence and elevated career prospects.
However, these casting choices also serve to perform other main functions for these
origin story movies besides lending verisimilitude to the onscreen fantasy. They also serve
not to distract from this spectacle. Dyer has, co-related to his point about the extratextual
foreknowledge of movie audiences, a caveat that there are instances where a star’s
existing public image clashes with, and overshadows, the character he plays onscreen.
Such instances are naturally detrimental to the film. James McAvoy’s early career as a
serious stage actor, for example, synchronises with his role as the cerebral telepath
Professor X, and connects him with the older iteration of the Professor, who was played
by veteran British stage actor Patrick Stewart. If, however, a major scandal involving McAvoy had broken out during the circulation of First Class, or if the Professor had been
played by an established action hero like Brad Pitt, there would have been opportunities
for audiences to read these disjunctive instances against the character of the Professor.
Extratextual knowledge of this sort can potentially draw audiences out of the diegetic
world-illusion whenever the star appears onscreen and performs in ways incompatible to
his public image (Dyer 1979, p. 148).
Additionally, the trend towards casting lesser-known leads is a way of keeping down
the budget of an already expensive movie. When considering the proven and future
profitability of the MCU, it was major news in the world of entertainment that during
May 2013 the ‘Avengers’ Cast and Stingy Marvel [were] Ready to Rumble over Sequel
Cash & Strong-Arming’ (Finke 2013). The actors playing these superheroes in this
crossover team-up movie were reported as being deeply unhappy with their salaries and
negotiating higher pay before working on The Avengers 2: Age of Ultron (2015). Robert
Downey Jr earned US$70 million from his lead role as Iron Man in The Avengers (2012),
and Scarlett Johansson earned US$20 million for her supporting role as Black Widow
(Kroll 2013). However, Chris Evans and Chris Hemsworth, who respectively played
Captain America and Thor in the same movie, were reported as being paid comparative
‘pittances for their first movies, not much better for the sequels, and are counting for at
least US$5 million upfront and better back-end [merchandising deals] for Avengers 2’
(Finke 2013). Were the other four supporting actors able to command salaries equivalent
to Johannson in The Avengers, however, Marvel would have had to pay the six Avengers
actors US$170 million in total before production started. This is about equal to
the total production budget of the average tentpole blockbuster movie in postmillennial
Hollywood, and more than the US$140 million and US$150 million budgets of Captain
America and Thor respectively. There would be an accretive effect, too, where subsequent
solo Captain America and Thor films would need to be vastly higher budgeted in order to
keep with the increasing demands of their lead actors). Having a lesser-known actor thus
gives the studio more bargaining power when contract negotiations and renegotiations
begin, and allows the studio to maximise its profits once the movie is released.
In sum, then, the casting of lesser-known stars as leads in the MCU is a canny exercise
by Marvel Studios in the management of paratextual star narratives and trajectories, of the
verisimilitude of the onscreen fantasy, and of the studio’s present and future bargaining
leverage.

Multimedia multiplicity

For all these textually privileged assertions, however, Robert Downey Jr is not actually
Iron Man. Nor are his compatriots really Captain America or Thor. These superheroes are
concepts, the centrepieces of long-running, character-driven commodity franchises. These
commodity franchises were conceived long before these formerly unknown actors were
even born. The movies these actors star in – as big budget, heavily promoted, and widely
released as they are – may currently occupy a privileged space at the top of the
intertextual and paratextual hierarchies that circulate around the individual superhero
franchise, and may indeed linger on as key texts within the franchise due to their copious
amounts of spin-off merchandising. Yet these movies and their associated characters and
actors are ultimately but a single iteration of the character concept that drives the superhero commodity franchise. Here, Henry Jenkins’ observations regarding the practices of
postmillennial superhero comic-book industry producers spring to mind. Jenkins finds that
these producers have embraced the principle of narrative multiplicity, simultaneously creating multiple comics that feature differing riffs on the core version of any given
superhero:

Today, comics have entered a period where principles of multiplicity are felt at least as
powerfully as those of continuity. Under this new system, readers may consume multiple
versions of the same franchise, each with different conceptions of the character, different
understandings of their relationships with the secondary figures, different moral perspectives,
exploring different moments in their lives, and so forth. So that in some storylines, Aunt May
knows Spider-Man’s secret identity while in others she doesn’t; in some Peter Parker is still a
teen and in others, he is an adult science teacher; in some, he is married to Mary Jane and in
others, they have broken up, and so forth. (Jenkins 2009, p. 21)

Jenkins adds that this shift towards narrative multiplicity displaces, but is not meant to
eradicate, narrative continuity. Rather, the strategy of narrative multiplicity is meant to
complement that of narrative continuity, ‘so that we do not lose interest in having
compelling stories within individual issues as we move into the continuity era nor do
comics readers and producers lose interest in continuity as we enter into a period of
multiplicity’ (Jenkins 2009, p. 21). By way of example, Marvel 1602 (Gaiman and Kubert
2003) is an alternate narrative universe in which Marvel superheroes originate from, and
adventure in, Elizabethan England instead of present-day America. It later spawned the
related titles Marvel 1602: New World (Pak and Tocchini 2006) and Marvel 1602:
Fantastick Four (David and Alixe 2007). At no time during the original Marvel 1602’s
eight-month run did the regular adventures of superheroes in the main Marvel Universe –
a narrative continuity designated as Universe 616 – cease publication, nor were any
already-existing adventures invalidated by the Marvel 1602-brand titles. Jenkins sees
these intertwined strategies as beneficial ones. Where solely focusing on narrative continuity does privilege fans who have faithfully consumed the (very) long-running stories
of comic-book superheroes month after month:
it might also act as a barrier to entry for new readers who often found continuity-heavy books
difficult to follow. [However,] the contemporary focus on multiplicity may similarly reward
the mastery of longtime fans but around a different axis of consumption. (Jenkins 2009, p. 21)

In other words, the longtime fan will be able to appreciate the arresting differences
between each iteration of the superhero, while new readers are not lost when comicbooks reference stories that take place in previously published issues.
While this combination of continuity and multiplicity came about as a result of wellestablished superhero brands and a saturated comic-books market, such an interlocking
double logic is also extendable towards postmillennial comic-book superhero films. With
regard to continuity, Martyn Pedler finds that the story of how a superhero became a
superhero – his origin story – ‘explains everything that anybody will ever need to know
about the character. Why he does what he does and why he is who he is’ (2007, p. 9). The
retelling of each superhero’s formative origin story in these widely-released and wellattended films thus not only provides a convenient entry point for new audiences, but also
lays the groundwork for future film sequels and spin-offs that also involve the same and
familiar iteration of this superhero. As of March 2012, Captain America: The Winter
Soldier, set to be released in 2014, did not yet even have a director. However, its writers
were already saying that they intended to continue on from the endings of Captain
America and (at that time unreleased) The Avengers, which see the superhero revived to
fight evil in contemporary times: ‘We made a movie where the world was in context for [Captain America] … Now he’s in the now, and there is nothing black-and-white. So you’re given this huge new palate [sic] to work with, but you can keep him the same’
(Lesnick 2011). Narrative continuity, even at this early stage of development, is conceived of as an attraction for the putative audiences of the Captain America: The Winter Soldier (2014) sequel: they will get to experience the further adventures of Chris Evans’ Captain America in it, and thus perhaps be collectively persuaded to at least equal the first movie’s US$300 million-plus box-office gross (The Numbers 2013).
With regard to multiplicity, producers can use the filmic iteration of the superhero as a gateway for audiences to consume other iterations of the superhero. The MCU, despite having similarities to the Universe 616 of the comics, is meant to be in Universe 199999, a co-existing but separate narrative continuity from Universe 616. As such, the July 2011 release of Captain America was heralded during the preceding months by comics such as Captain America: First Vengeance #2 (van Lente and Ross 2011) that, tying-in directly with the film, were distinctively solicited as ‘The OFFICIAL comics prequel to the Marvel Studios summer blockbuster’ (CBR News Team 2011b; original emphasis). The very end of June 2011 itself, however, also saw the release of Captain America: Rebirth
#1 (Lee and Kesel 2011), reprints of early comics in which:

as the evils of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi party spread across Europe, Steve Rogers becomes the legendary Captain America! With his sidekick, Bucky, and under the direction of Franklin Roosevelt himself, Cap battles the diabolical Red Skull on every front! (CBR News Team 2011a)

With its exclamation-point-laden syntax and bright primary colours, Captain America: Rebirth is tonally and aesthetically different from the everyday American English and the muted sepia film tint that characterise Captain America. Nor is Franklin Roosevelt present in the latter. But an iteration of Captain America is eminently present in the film, as are iterations of Bucky and the Red Skull. And the latter three were all present in both the continuing Universe 616 stories Captain America and Bucky #620 (Brubaker and Samnee 2011) and Fear Itself #4 (Fraction and Immonen 2011), which were also released in conjunction with the MCU film. These similar-enough markers of familiarity, shared across multiple narrative continuities and media platforms, allow producers to maximise
their profits from the same core intellectual property.
It is these notions of continuity and iterative multiplicity that point to the superheroes of these films having a virtual life outside the cineplex. Despite being a fictional concept with neither an actual birth certificate nor a social security number, these superheroes have accumulated character histories. They are regularly featured on different media platforms, upon which they behave similarly-yet-differently enough. They are further presented as signifiers of extraordinariness, and thus as a point of interest deserving the attention of
audiences. They are recognisable due to their continued (largely) favourable coverage in the media. Their presence endorses texts and products, locating them within specific regimes of quality and pleasures, and this feeds, Ouroboros-like, into these superheroes once again being featured regularly on different media platforms.2 In sum, these notions of continuity and iterative multiplicity point to these superheroes as being what Chris Rojek has termed ‘celeactors’ (2004, p. 23).

Celeactors and synthespians
In keeping with the rapid development of graphical and information technologies, the body of academic literature surrounding the virtual production of celebrities has multiplied. Chris Rojek’s influential work on contemporary celebrity draws from and updates the Shakespearean observation that there exist three broad categories of great people: those who happen to born great, those who achieve greatness, and those who have greatness thrust upon them. He finds that in the category of those who have had greatness concentrated and attributed upon them, there exists the ‘celeactor’: ‘a fictional character who is either momentarily ubiquitous or becomes an institutional feature of popular culture. … adjuncts of the mass media. They cater to the public appetite for a character type that sums up the times’ (Rojek 2004, p. 23). He further states that these celeactors are intimations of a better, gentler utopia, for they are ‘invariably satirical creations. Their purpose is to deflate the sanctimony of public figures or to highlight allegations of moral bankruptcy in public life’ (Rojek 2004, p. 24). Rojek even specifically singles out Superman and Batman as celeactors, finding that their character-franchises in sum ‘present idealized representations of American heroism and the defence of justice’ (2004, p. 25). Captain America and his cineplex contemporaries can in this vein thus be provisionally classified as celeactors as well. For all that they are fictional, they are recognisable. They can be associated with specific iconographies and practices, and are accessible and more importantly reaccessible through many media platforms. Their justbegun/never-ending fight for truth and justice symbolically addresses and resolves tensions pertinent to the ages that they were (re)created in, such as Nazi invasions and terrorist threats.
Rojek’s work exists alongside related research on the rise of the virtual celebrity, or ‘synthespian’ (Creed 2003, p. 159). In the 1950s, Andre Bazin wrote of the early cinema as being inspired by the then-recent Industrial Revolution’s concern with developing methods and technologies to mechanically reproduce and represent reality, for in cases as wide ranging as from photography to the phonograph, the early cinema traded in ‘an integral realism, a recreation of the world in its own image, an image unburdened by the freedom of interpretation of the artist or the irreversibility of time’ (Bazin 2004, p. 21).
But the contemporary virtual celebrity – born from multiple media platforms – has no such integral realism. What it has, rather, are lines of computer code and Photoshop effects masking its artificiality. As Jean Baudrillard would doubtlessly find, it is a simulacral being of the third order, a copy that despite having a lost/non-existent original referent – or at best exists only in the minds of its audience-consumers – adroitly continues to circulate in the contemporary mediascape3 (2006, pp. 454–455).
Accordingly, Barbara Creed, in relation to the representative function of the contemporary cinema, questions the need for reality as original referent. She opines that ‘the ower of technology to alter reality has always been an integral part of the cinema rocess. … the crucial issues are less to do with reality than with communication’ Creed 2003, p. 165). She further finds that the virtual celebrity has potential ‘to epitomise  digitised form of beauty that is flawless … offer[ing] an idealised image as the basis for pectator identification’ (Creed 2003, pp. 168–171), perhaps in a better way than human tars will ever be able to. Mary Flanagan is even more utopian in her outlook. She onsiders synthespians as a natural evolution of the contemporary era’s mediated celebrity ulture, where the body of the star must necessarily function as a widely-circulated isembodied image to achieve fame. This body-image, then, is ‘generally mediated, ccessible only through media, and always perfect. … the non-corporeal digital star is accordingly] a perfect match to a technology of representation and subjectivities that ediate our experience’ (Flanagan 1999, p. 17). Flanagan concludes that these synthespians ‘will begin to have more than image appeal. They [will] appeal instead to a new ense of “agency” – yet always an agency directed to the fulfilment of our fantasies’ (1999, p. 20). While Flanagan was specifically talking about how the videogame avatar enables its controllers to safely and masterfully act out power fantasies such as tomb aiding or street fighting, her discussion of agency and fantasy fulfilment can be extended to the multimedia franchises that centre around the superheroes of postmillennial comic book films. Purveying easily available fetishised commodities, these superhero multimedia franchises afford consumers the agency to consume more stories and ancillary products featuring a favourite (iteration of) a superhero, even if across multiple platforms. This cross-platform consumption allows consumers a false and pleasing fantasy of empowerment; they have, of their own volition, successfully navigated different media and wound up with extended access to/knowledge of the superhero.
These conceptions of simulacral celeactors and idealised synthespians are important because, as Scott Bukatman has shown, the hyperbolic physical or mental abilities of superheroes point to the metagenre’s underlying concern with the body as a splintered locus of transformation and identity. Superhero comics ‘narrate the body in stories and envision the body in drawings. The body is obsessively centred upon … The superhero body is everything – a corporeal, rather than cognitive, mapping of the subject into a cultural system’ (Bukatman 2003, p. 49). It is such an obsession with the body that has allowed superheroes to embody ‘shifting attitudes towards flesh, self, and society’ (Bukatman 2003, p. 51), ranging from them being initially being ‘armoured against the shocks of industrial society … [shifting to incarnating] problematic and painfully reductive definitions of masculine power and presence’ (2003, p. 51) during the mid 1990s. Regardless of these shifting attitudes, however, the ideal body in the metagenre’s narratives is one that must be flawless. It is Superman – square-jawed, barrel-chested, dark hair artfully spit-curled – who comic-books typically cast in the role of hero, not the bald and middle-aged Lex Luthor. This superheroic body must remain healthy and vital. It must not be seen to age, and when it dies, as happened in (among countless other instances) The Death of Captain America, can only do so for a while. Captain America: Reborn (Brubaker and Hitch 2010) soon followed this little death, joining titles such as Absolute Batman and Robin: Batman Reborn (Morrison and Quitely 2012), The Death and Return of Superman (Stern and Jurgens 2007), and Heroes Reborn: Iron Man (Lobdell and Lee 2006).
For all that Captain America and Thor featured shots that lingered on the nude, muscled torsos of Chris Evans and Chris Hemsworth – the trailer for Captain America is particularly amusing, with its showcasing of a female secret agent reaching out, in a combination of disbelief and arousal, to touch the good Captain’s bulging pectorals – the youth and strength of these actors will be fleeting. In a July 2011 media interview, Evans admits that the physical workouts that prepared him for the Captain America role left him needing to vomit, and alludes to not being in superheroic shape any more, for he has ‘a fast metabolism and … lose[s] weight very quickly’ (Miller 2011). Similarly, Hemsworth mentions that he followed a strict exercise regime and diet plan to gain 10 kg of muscle mass for his role, and that he had shed most of this muscle by the time Thor was in theatres (Buzzsugar 2011). The star narratives that an ageing, less muscular Evans and Hemsworth – who would presumably also have accumulated a larger body of acting work by then – would bring to putative future instalments (five years, 10
years, 20 years) of their respective superhero franchises would then sharply be at odds with not only the endlessly recirculating iconography of these specific superheroes as peak physical specimens, but divulging from the body-worshipping core ethic of the metagenre as well.4 Multiplicity only goes so far. Featuring an aged Captain America or an old Thor in blockbuster movies meant to be the flagship texts of a superhero franchise would thus not cast these superheroes in a flatteringly similar-but-different light. Rather, they would be unpleasantly unheimlich (weird), especially considering that future movies would have to appeal to a new generation of fan-consumers in an entertainment industry that has traditionally successfully harnessed images of youth for its onscreen appeal.

Men out of time

The commonplace casting of unknown actors as the leads in postmillennial comic-book films, then, is thus presentable as the latest attempt by the producers of superhero texts to profitably engage with the conveniently oneiric climate that characterises the metagenre. In 1961, Umberto Eco analysed about 200 issues of the long-running Superman and Action Comics comic books to argue that the superhero exists within an oneiric climate that operates contrary to classical and rational notions of time as a linear event-narrative. These linear conceptions have the idea of time intertwined alongside that of causal succession, with what has happened ‘before causally determining after, and the series of these determinations [as untraceable and irreversible]’ (Eco 1984, p. 16). Time is here seen as a ‘structure of possibility’ (Eco 1984, p. 17), which allows its subjects to ‘mov[e] towards a future, having behind [them] a past’ (1984, p. 17). In other words, event A precipitates event B, which in turn begets event C, all the way ad infinitum, with its subjects eternally unable to revisit earlier points along this continuum. One cannot travel back in time to punch Hitler,
nor stop time to prevent a neo-Nazi rally from ever occurring.
By contrast, the notion of linear time breaks down in Eco’s Superman comic strips. An individual story is not referenced once completed, for if ‘it took Superman up again at the point where he left off, he would have taken a step toward death’ (Eco 1984, p. 17). This is especially important since ‘Superman has been around since 1938 … the public would realize the comicality of the situation, as happened in the case of Little Orphan Annie, who prolonged her disaster-ridden childhood for decades’ (Eco 1984, p. 17). Rather, the Superman of these succeeding stories simply performs, in peak physical prime, the same crime-fighting heroic function that he does in the earlier stories. He is unaware both of the similar events that have occurred in previous stories, and of the similar events that will occur again in the future. In effect, Superman exists as the hero of an eternally revolving cyclic narrative, where events recur and recur again. The time–space in which he operates is thus essentially a mutable dreamscape:

The stories develop in a kind of oneiric climate – of which the reader is not aware at all – where what has happened before and what has happened after appears extremely hazy. The narrator picks up the strand of the event again and again as if he had forgotten to say something and wanted to add details to what had already been said. (Eco 1984, p. 17)

The style of storytelling in superhero comics has changed drastically since Eco’s observation. The titles of Eco’s day were primarily targeted at children and adolescents. They were transient products par excellence, typically printed with cheap paper and ink, and sold cheaply at locations such as newsstands or drugstores, ‘much more likely to end up yellowed, torn, and used as source material for Silly Putty imprints rather than for research purposes’ (Pedler 2007, p. 1). These audiences could thus quickly consume a complete adventure within the space of a train or bus ride. Captain America Comics #1 (Simon and
Kirby 1941), for example, has Captain America starring in four separate and complete adventures within its 45 pages; he ingests the Super-Soldier Serum to become ‘the first of a corps of super-agents whose mental and physical ability will make them a terror to spies and saboteurs!’ (Simon and Kirby 1941, p. 5), then fights an undercover Nazi fortuneteller, thirdly smashes a Nazi spy ring, and finally defeats an early iteration of the Red Skull. By contrast, the long-running Universe 616 title was relaunched after the 2011 blockbuster movie, and the 24 pages of the new Captain America #1 (Brubaker and McNiven 2011) reads as the first part of the first act of a serial story; in contemporary times, Captain America attends the funeral of his World War 2 love interest (who was hardly referenced in contemporary Captain America comics until around the advent of the movie) and supervillians elsewhere plot their vendetta against him.
Decompressed storytelling – where a single main plotline unfolds over multiple issues – is thus now the idiom that dominates comic-books, for these products now target lateteenage to adult readers, and producers now tend to bind individual related comic-book issues together into collected trade paperbacks soon after the initial publication of these issues. There is an apparently stronger focus on narrative continuity. The following month’s issue continues the story that Captain America #1 started, and so on up until concluding in early 2012. Subsequent and inevitable issues built upon these events. But the forward-progressing narrative continuity that the decompressed mode offers is only illusory. The Universe 616-shaking crossover event for 2007, Civil War (Millar and McNiven 2008), was predicated on Iron Man and Captain America vehemently opposing
each other’s ideologies so much so that they were brawling in (nigh-)mortal combat that indirectly led to Captain America’s death. As of 2013, however, the pair are now friends again. Captain America returned from the dead, and together they led the Avengers during the Siege of Asgard (Bendis and Coipel 2012). These superheroes have essentially returned to the narrative point they were at prior to 2007. The dreams may now take longer to recycle, but the oneiric climate still characterises superhero adventures.
The MCU’s approach to continuity and the oneiric climate falls somewhere in between that of these two eras of comic-books. Each individual movie is a self-contained adventure, but will build upon plot threads that were advanced during preceding movies in the universe, and will in turn introduce new plot threads to be advanced upon during succeeding MCU outings.6 Captain America, for example, fleshes out the character of Iron Man’s father Howard Stark. Briefly seen in Iron Man 2 as a middle-aged industrialist, he is portrayed here as a daredevil aviator who assists Captain America during World War 2. Captain America further expands upon the powers of the Cosmic Cube, a wish-granting artefact previously liberated from the Frost Giants in Thor that features as a doomsday weapon in The Avengers.
　This second move is oddly appropriate. The Avengers saved the MCU from the Cube,
but this universe remains one which must ultimately end. As of December 2013, for
example, Marvel had not yet formally announced further Captain America movies beyond Captain America: The Winter Soldier (2014) and The Avengers: Age of Ultron
(2015). Chris Evans has mentioned that his contract spans six movies, though, which he believes will be split between a Captain America trilogy and an Avengers trilogy (Total Film 2011). But what happens after this sixth movie? Considering that five years lapsed between the release of 2008’s Iron Man and 2012’s The Avengers, and that The Avengers: Age of Ultron will be released in 2015 at the very earliest, The Avengers 3 is likely to be released in either late 2018 or 2019. At least eight years will have thus passed in real time since Captain America and The Avengers 3. With the superhero metagenre obsessively and oneirically focused on perfect bodies and eternal youth as it is, an ageing Evans would be an increasingly bad fit for later MCU movies. Even Warner Brothers’ DC Comics movie division seems to realise this, with the director and lead actor for the financially successful postmillennial film iteration of Batman constantly reiterating in pre-release interviews that The Dark Knight Rises (2012) would not only be diegetically set eight years after the previous two films – roughly corresponding to and acknowledging the real-world years that will have passed between the first one, Batman Begins, and The Dark Knight Rises – but would be the last film for that particular cycle.
But since the real-world purpose of the superhero is to be a franchise which profitably and constantly generates commodities for its consumers to purchase, it needs to be reworkable and representable for its current and (more importantly) future audiences. As Fredric Jameson finds, an ethos of commodity fetishism dominates postmodern society, so much so that narrative itself is hypercommodified (1979, p. 130). Where older adventure tales can be broken down into combinations of signs that were deployed to create excitement and sustain reader interest, ‘this is still a relatively primitive stage in the commodification of narrative’ (Jameson 1979, p. 133). For the various popular ‘sagas [of contemporary media outlets] can be seen as so many commodities towards whose consumption the narratives are little more than means, their essential materiality then being confirmed and embodied in the movie music that accompanies their screen versions’ (Jameson 1979, p. 133).
As such, it is the celeactor, not the human actor portraying it, who is of paramount importance to the franchise. The titles of these movies make this focus explicit. They are not the abstracted summary-promises of the comics like Siege or Civil War. Rather, they simply state the superhero’s name or superhero team’s name as the movie’s main title, and the particularities of their current adventure as the subtitle: Iron Man, Captain America, X-Men: First Class, The Avengers. The Dark Knight Rises is as abstract as one gets for the main title of a superhero movie, and even this abstraction rides upon the superhero’s name value as its selling point. It is the celeactor, then, who is the real star of these movies, not Chris Evans, nor Chris Hemsworth, not even Robert Downey Jr. Were Iron Man and Captain America to fight one another in the MCU, this particular film would not be entitled Civil War. It would be entitled The Avengers: Civil War, or Iron Man vs. Captain America.7 At the level of narrative, world-shaking threats may come and go, and alliances may be forged or be broken. Yet these scenarios must remain a secondary attraction. It is the superhero, at the level of the franchise-commodity, who must remain a clear and present fetish-object for audiences, with threats in the film’s diegesis marketed as being centred around it, not the other way around. 
 An unknown actor – or one whose star is on the wane – is thus indeed cheap labour who, appropriately for producers, allows the appealing zero-to-hero conceit of the Bildungsroman to be paratextually articulated through his previous lack of a strong surrounding star narrative, give verisimilitude to the onscreen fantasy, and not detract from the diegetic spectacle. More pertinent to this casting choice, however, is the fact that he is a usefully disposable tool for asserting the primacy of the celeactor – as opposed to the actor – as the key attraction for the audiences of these accordingly bluntly-titled superhero film franchises. It is the superhero celeactor, much more so than the previously unknown actor, that Marvel wants audiences to be familiar with, after all. ‘I am Iron Man’ and other similar statements thus read as signposts that not only articulate the celeactor’s desirability, but further signpost audiences to other texts in the franchise, blatantly promising that these other texts will rearticulate the pleasures that were present in the blockbuster film. 
 This is especially so since a second MCU will inevitably follow the end of the current one. This new universe is adroitly possible in the updated oneiric climate of postmillennial comic-book superhero films, and in the spirit of multiplicity that characterises the postmillennial comic-book superhero. The point of the superhero celeactor, then, is not that he is played by any particular Hollywood star, nor that he is tied to any historical moment beyond the ever-shifting ‘present-day’. (The only exceptions, perhaps, are Captain America and the X-Men’s Magneto, and even then their past experiences – during World War 2 and during the Cuban Missile Crisis –are clearly demarcated as a separate sphere from the ‘present-day’ within which they primarily operate.) Where, for example, the Iron Man of the comics originally forged his armour when he was captured during the Vietnam War of the 1960s, the movie has him captured by Middle Eastern terrorists during the post-9/11 era. Similarly, Captain America was indeed frozen during the last days of World War 2, but he awakens ‘now’ – in the four-colour pages of the 1960s Marvel Renaissance, in the three-dimensional postmillennial blockbuster film – as a man out of his own time. As Eco mentions, time in superhero adventures is essentially an unstable construct. Timelines float, such that ancillary details about these superheroes are being elided or embellished all the time.
Rather, the point of the superhero celeactor is that he is an ahistorical figure and concept, which can be deployed by his producers as an articulation of whichever particular valencies of heroism are celebrated by society at the date of deployment. Equally key is that he has to be seen transitioning from the undifferentiated Everyman to the famous Superman, and as such has to be seen performing superheroic deeds that are largely consistent with whichever parameters have already been established by the preceding franchise. As such, no matter when the superhero is reawakened or reforged, his hero-journey – which has already been experienced by audiences in the past of the fauxElizabethan 1602 comics, the ‘now’ of the (as of this writing) current MCU origin films, and earlier still in the ‘now’ of the 1960s – is thus easily repeatable with a second unknown actor in the lead role of neophyte superhero.

Conclusion

‘The truth is … I am Iron Man.’ ‘I am Captain America.’ These are statements as complex as they are blatant. On one hand, they allow Marvel Studios – and the producers of postmillennial comic-book superhero films in general – to signal to audiences that the formerly undistinguished lead characters of these films have experienced positive character development, and are now supermen, mirroring the real-world ascent to fame that these films have afforded their formerly obscure actors. At the same time, these statements mesh well with the updated oneiric and ahistorical climate surrounding the superhero metagenre. In a metagenre and industry that both celebrate celeactors in their physical prime so much so that these celeactors never seem to age, the unknown actor is a usefully disposable tool. He is easily replaceable by Marvel Studios with another when the current
film cycle involving the superhero ends and a new one begins. They are just spokes on the wheel that is the superhero intellectual property franchise, and this wheel needs to keep on turning in order to profit Marvel’s employees.8 Further, his relative lack of paratextual star narrative not only helps convince audiences of the verisimilitude of the onscreen fantasy, but also asserts that it is the character – as opposed to the actor – who is the primary attraction for the present and future audiences of the superhero franchise. ‘Whosoever holds this hammer, if he be worthy, shall possess the power of Thor’ indeed.

