Journal of Creativity in Mental Health


How the Marvel Cinematic Universe Represents
Our Quality World: An Integration of Reality
How the Marvel Cinematic Universe Represents
Our Quality World: An Integration of Reality
Therapy/Choice Theory and Cinema Therapy

This article presents the integration of cinematherapy with William
Glasser’s reality therapy/choice theory. This article also addresses
the need to integrate reality therapy/choice theory and the therapeutic intervention known as “cinematherapy” to help students
conceptualize the constructs of Glasser’s choice theory and to help
novice cinema therapists address Glasser’s themes in their clients’
lives (i.e., fun, survival, power, freedom, love, and belonging).
This integration will be helpful to not only students and clients,
but also to the community of therapists who will intend to use
cinematherapy as a therapeutic and creative intervention.
KEYWORDS choice theory, cinematherapy,
counseling, reality therapy, superheroes

COMIC BOOK FILM HISTORY

The first modern superhero film Superman (Salkind, Salkind, Spengler, &
Donner, 1978) was not only a great achievement in film making but was
also a huge success at the box office. It was also one of the first movies
my parents took me to see as a child, and it would be 11 years before
another superhero film would capture my imagination and the imagination of other film lovers. Batman (Guber, Melniker, Uslan, & Burton, 1989),
directed by Tim Burton, did just that, and it became the film franchise that
every studio dreams of having. It sparked three sequels, Batman Returns
(Burton, Di Novi, & Burton, 1992), Batman Forever (Burton, MacGregorScott, & Schulmacher, 1995), and Batman and Robin (MacGregor-Scott
& Schulmacher, 1997), which were all very profitable at the box office.
Although I saw all the Batman movies in theaters, I never read or picked
up the comic.
The Batman and Superman films were all based on comic characters
from the DC Comic universe, a universe I never truly understood as a child.
In the DC Comic universe, large cities such as Metropolis (where Clark
Kent/Superman resides) and Gotham City (where Bruce Wayne/Batman
resides) are imagined worlds that are similar to but distinct from our world
and reality. They are worlds full of English-speaking aliens, Amazonian
women with magic lassos, magical rings that can create anything generated from the imagination of the user, and a superhero with an orange shirt
(Aquaman) who communicates telepathically with fish. Comic book readers
who enjoy the DC Comic universe fully engage in this odd, but parallel,
universe. In the case of the Marvel universe, there is a difference: it is based
on our world and reality. Superpowers are mostly gained by strange accidents and genetic mutations, and it is because of this reason I have always
preferred the Marvel universe over the DC Comic universe.

Marvel’s Film History
The Incredible Hulk television series (Johnson & Parriott, 1977), which aired
on CBS, was a popular show based on a Marvel-created character. However,
Marvel superheroes did not enjoy the same type of cinematic success that DC
Comic heroes had in the 1980s on the big screen. The vast majority of films
that depicted Marvel characters during the 1980s and 1990s were not well
received. In the late 1990s, the Marvel Comic-based film Blade (1998) became
a surprise cult hit. Blade (Franfurt, Snipes, Engelman, Horne, & Norrington,
1998) was about a young man (Blade) who became a feared vampire
hunter after his mother (while pregnant with him) was killed by a vampire.
However, it was not until director Bryan Singer’s X-Men (Donner, Winter,
& Singer, 2000) that the initial wave of Marvel films featuring superheroes
began to appear. The X-Men franchise is a unique superhero franchise that
addresses real-life issues such as prejudice, social persecution, and homophobia, which are thinly veiled by the films’ continuing storyline of mutants
dealing with an intolerant and fearful world. Marvel Entertainment and various collaborating studios have produced at least one film a year since 2000’s
X-Men.
In the last decade, many of these films based on Marvel characters dealt
with other serious issues such as loss and grief. With so many superhero films
being released in such a short period of time, the term “superhero genre”
came to existence to describe a film based on a comic character (there are
some exceptions) or on a character who saves lives using unnatural powers
or abilities.
I am not the first counselor educator to write about superheroes or
the superhero genre in regards to therapy and wellness. Lawrence Rubin
wrote about how the superhero mythology can be used to help client
re-create clients’ personal myths with the use of narrative therapy (Rubin,
2009) and how the superhero myth can help clients reclaim loss in adoption
(Rubin, 2005). Articles have also been written discussing the use of comic
book heroes and theoretical orientations (Kaufman, 2007). After reading
these articles, I believe that the origin stories of superheroes have become
new mythologies used to find new meanings in life because the superhero
story integrates drama and the morality tale in the same way that Greek
mythology does.

Marvel’s Cinematic Universe
Recently, Marvel reached a new level of success with its own independent
studio (Marvel Studios), which produced Iron Man (Arad, Feige, & Favreau,
2008), the first installment of the “Marvel Cinematic Universe.” The films in
the Marvel Cinematic Universe, a term coined to describe the shared cinematic world of these characters, include not only Iron Man (Arad, Feige,
et al., 2008), but also The Incredible Hulk (Arad, Hurd, Feige, & Leterrier,
2008), Iron Man 2 (Feige & Favreau, 2010), Captain America: The First
Avenger (Feige & Johnston, 2011), Thor (Feige & Branagh, 2011), and The
Avengers (Feige & Whedon, 2012). The six films have been widely viewed
and have generated billions of dollars in box office revenue across the world,
including my own money that I spent when these films entered theaters.
Kevin Feige, the person who coined the term Marvel Cinematic Universe, has
produced more than 20 films featuring Marvel Comic characters. In creating
the Marvel Cinematic Universe, Feige has created a universe where characters such as Iron Man, Captain America, the Incredible Hulk, Nick Fury, Thor,
Hawkeye, and the Black Widow all coexist in one shared reality on screen.

RATIONALE
Cinematherapy, which is the use of film for therapeutic purposes, is considered by many people to be an extension of bibliotherapy. “By watching the
films and discussing the stories, characters struggles, and moral dilemmas
presented in specific movies, clients and therapist can access meaningful
metaphorical content for clients” (Solomon, 2001, as cited in Byrd, Forisha,
& Ramsdell, 2006, p. 2). Cinematherapy as a technique can not only improve
learning, but it can facilitate growth. Traditionally, a cinema therapist will
use the plot and characters to help clients understand problems in their own
life or to help provide insight (Sharp, Smith, & Cole, 2002). One of the major
advantages of cinematherapy is that it allows for processing of difficult material in an indirect manner (Sharp et al., 2002). Cinematherapy may also help
clients talk about their problems. Powell (2008) acknowledged that why and
how cinematherapy works “remains uncertain” (p. 14). One thing that is certain is that cinematherapy can be used as an assignment within a variety
of theoretical orientations, and it can be used as a model for our behaviors
(Sharp et al., 2002).
Research has shown that films can be an educational experience (Powell
2008). Additionally, the use of films as an education tool for both students
and clients has been well cited (Berg-Cross, Jennings & Baruch, 1990; Higgins
& Dermer, 2001; Manchel, 2010). For students, it provides a new way to learn
unfamiliar and strange concepts. For clients, it can be used as a way to gain
new insight about their behaviors and the world in which they live. However,
not every film can be used for cinematherapy and not every film provides
a learning experience. Many cinema therapists who use films as therapy
may stick with films that they consider tried and true (e.g., Ordinary People,
Schwary & Redford, 1980). According to Sharp et al. (2002), “Cinematherapy
is a therapeutic technique that involves careful selection and assignment of
films for clients to watch with a follow-up processing of their experience
during therapy sessions” (p. 270). The process of choosing films is difficult,
which is why many novice cinema therapists seek outside sources when they
want to use a film with a client. For example, cinema therapist Brigit Wolz
has created a website that provides a list of appropriate films and compiles
a list of these films under themes such as inspiration, personal issues, and
social issues, which makes the selection process of films easier for novice
cinema therapists (http://www.cinematherapy.com). However, there are no
superhero films anywhere on the list.
I believe that superhero films have therapeutic value. Additionally, I
propose that this article can be used to teach the constructs of Glasser’s
reality therapy/choice theory in a fun and engaging way. I also propose that
these films have application to counseling practice. I believe that this article
will provide counseling students with a guide to incorporating the superhero
genre of film into practice and will provide clients with an understanding
of how life needs (fun, freedom, survival, power, and love-belonging) are
interrelated and essential to finding satisfaction and happiness in life.

Using Cinematherapy to Teach Theoretical Orientations
Cinematherapy is not new to the world of counseling. However, the use of
film as an effective tool for facilitating the teaching of counseling theories
is relatively new. Koch and Dollarhide (2000) described the use of Good
Will Hunting (Bender & Van Sandt, 1997) as a teaching tool for students
in a counseling theories class. In their study, students were told to write a
reflection paper on the theory of the week (cognitive behavioral therapy,
rational emotive behavior therapy, etc.) using the film Good Will Hunting
(Bender & Van Sandt, 1997) as a teaching tool for each paper throughout
the semester. In a more recent article, the film October Sky (Gordon, Franco,
& Johnson, 1999) was used as an effective tool in teaching career theories
to counseling students in a master’s-level course (Scholl, Gibson, Despres, &
Boyarinova, 2014). I propose the use of a group of films that have a shared
world and universe to provide a greater and more enhanced understanding
of one counseling theory with multiple constructs, William Glasser’s reality
therapy/choice theory.
This article examines how superhero films can help facilitate the learning of a theoretical orientation for students and how themes from reality
therapy/choice theory could be addressed with clients in session. Superhero
films may not receive a lot of attention in counselor education literature, but
superheroes do. Lawrence Rubin discussed the use of superhero metaphors
extensively throughout his books and his articles. However, superhero film
usage in cinematherapy still needs support. Additionally, counselor educators
who use cinematherapy as an intervention still need to provide a rationale
for why it is useful (Powell 2008). This article and subsequent studies using
this creative intervention will provide support for its usefulness.
I will not only show how cinematherapy and theoretical orientations
like reality therapy/choice theory can be integrated, but I will show how the
integration can help counselor educators teach students the interrelatedness
of Glasser’s constructs. I will do this by using each of the individual films of
the Marvel Cinematic Universe as a representation of one of the constructs
of Glasser’s reality therapy/choice theory.

ASSUMPTIONS
When integrating cinematherapy with reality therapy/choice theory with a
client or with a student, consider these assumptions.
1. Cinematherapy is an effective tool for learning for students and clients.
2. Cinematherapy allows the clients to express themselves with greater ease.

Reality Therapy
William Glasser’s first theoretical model was known as reality therapy. Reality
therapy posits that human beings’ basic needs can be described as the need
to love and be loved by someone or a group for a feeling of belonging
and connection; the need for power through being competent; the need
for freedom through independence and autonomy while simultaneously
exercising personal responsibility; and the need for fun through pleasureseeking enjoyment and relaxation (Glasser, 1998). In reality therapy, the
principal constructs are action, behavior, control, and focus on the present
(Glasser, 1998). Glasser’s reality therapy evolved over the years to become
what he would later call choice theory, a theory used to frame reality therapy.

Choice Theory
Glasser stated that “for all practical purposes, we choose everything we do,
including the misery we feel” (Glasser, 1998, p. 3). Glasser further stated that
other people can neither make us miserable nor make us happy. Ultimately,
choice theory is a theoretical orientation that addresses the amount of power
that we have in our lives. The principal constructs in choice theory are fun,
survival, power, freedom, love, and belonging. These constructs are essential
to our growth and well-being. Additionally, Glasser believes that a deficit in
one of these constructs or needs creates an imbalance in the brain, which
results in a mental illness. Essentially, Glasser believes that depression and
anxiety may be a result of not having one of these needs met. Glasser further
posits that these constructs are essential to meeting our basic needs much
like Abraham Maslow’s basic needs were essentially to human survival (i.e.,
physiological, safety, love/belonging, esteem, and self-actualization).

Quality World
Glasser described the quality world as a world that is full of memories from
birth to death, which “is made up of small groups of specific pictures that
portray, more than anything else we know, the best ways to satisfy one or
more of our basic needs” (Glasser, 1998, p. 45). Glasser stated that these
pictures fall into three categories: “(a) the people we most want to be with,
(b) the things that we want to own or experience, and (c) the ideas or
systems of belief that govern much of our behavior” (Glasser, 1998, p. 45).
Thus, our quality world is our total life.

OBJECTIVES
Although this is a conceptual piece, this article discusses Glasser’s concepts
to the degree in which they are related. My objectives for this conceptual
piece are to give greater attention to the superhero genre and to spark
interest in using this creative intervention in an actual study. Counselors
can consider following these objectives when using an integration of
cinematherapy and reality therapy/choice theory:

1. Demonstrate the usefulness of cinematherapy in teaching a counseling
theory.
2. Illustrate how superhero films can be used in cinematherapy.
3. Help counselors in training understand the complexities of Glasser’s
reality therapy/choice theory.

CINEMATHERAPY PROCESS
It is imperative to have a basic understanding of how cinematherapy works.
But before the process starts, the therapist must thoroughly understand
Glasser’s concepts before the film is used with the client. The first step in
using cinematherapy is to carefully review the film. The second step is to
give the person watching the film a brief synopsis of what they are about to
see. The third step is to instruct the viewer to pay attention to their physical responses to the film while simultaneously focusing on the film. The
fourth and final step is to process the film with the viewer. Therapists using
cinematherapy should always ask for feedback after the film is processed.
Some films may not be suitable for all members of a group or with a single
client. Hence, it is best to discuss the film before recommending or showing
it to a client or group.

Adaptation of the Process
Students and clients can better understand William Glasser’s quality world by
experiencing the Marvel Cinematic Universe. Films such as Iron Man (Arad,
Feige, et al., 2008), Iron Man 2 (Feige & Favreau, 2010), Captain America:
The First Avenger (Feige & Johnston, 2011), Thor (Feige & Branagh, 2011),
and The Incredible Hulk (Arad, Hurd, et al., 2008) all have a singular theme
with one main protagonist. The Avengers (Feige & Whedon, 2012), the film
that unites all the main protagonists from the previous films, has one large
theme but encompasses many of the themes from the previous films. Each
film individually can be used as a metaphor for each one of Glasser’s reality
therapy/choice theory constructs.
To use Glasser’s reality therapy/choice theory in the Marvel Cinematic
Universe, we must first see the characters in the universe having a severe
amount of unhappiness and dissatisfaction or a mental illness. Mental illness is nothing new in the Marvel Comic universe (i.e., Harry and Norman
Osborn, Hank Pym, etc.). Because Glasser calls the absence of these missing
constructs “disconnections,” describing the disconnections of the characters’
lives as they relate to our lives is appropriate as well. In Glasser’s book,
Choice Theory: A New Psychology of Personal Freedom, he uses the film
Shine (Scott & Hicks, 1996) as an example to illustrate his point (Glasser,
1998, pp. 193–194). Because of my love and appreciation for the Marvel
Cinematic Universe and my hopes of writing a separate article about the
second phase, I will only include the films that Marvel Studios considers to
be part of the first phase of the Marvel Cinematic Universe. Therefore, I will
not review Iron Man 3(Feige & Black, 2013), Thor: The Dark Word (Feige &
Taylor, 2013), Captain America: The Winter Solider (Feige, Russo, & Russo,
2014), or Guardians of the Galaxy (Feige & Gunn, 2014), which are all part
of the second phase of the Marvel Cinematic Universe.

WILLIAM GLASSER’S CONSTRUCTS
Fun
Fun is a universal behavior in which all humans and animals engage. Fun
is also a “genetic reward for learning” (Wubbolding & Glasser, 1988, p. 41).
Our early ancestors survived because of the use of fun. It would be hard
to imagine the creation of spears and boats without the moments and thrills
of fun. According to Wubbolding and Glasser (1988), all behavior is intentional including fun. Fun is not only an intentional behavior, but it is also a
behavior that aids us in learning. Fun can also occur through various types
of play. Play may include physical activities (e.g., jump rope and playing
hide-and-seek) or it could be a mental activity (e.g., playing chess or playing
a video game) that aids us in learning. Furthermore, having fun is also a
way for us to create with our imagination, which is essential to our function
as human beings and is essential for our survival. Glasser also stated that
“creativity is crucial at the individual level to solve real-life issues” (p. 147).
Thus, we learn, have fun, and problem solve all at the same time, which is
also rewarding.
Fun involves activities we can do by ourselves or with other people. But
how much fun can we have by ourselves? And “What is fun if we do not learn
to share it with others?” (Glasser, 1998, p. 43). Glasser’s point can also be
considered with the familiar idiom of “the more the merrier.” When all is said
and done, the only thing that we want to have is fun (Glasser, 1998). Also,
what can be more fun than having fun with your friends? Friendship provides
the ultimate accomplice in fun. Glasser also believes that a friendship is one
without ownership (Glasser, 1998, p. 36), meaning that fun has to include
some freedom, another of Glasser’s constructs.

Survival
Survival may be the most important thing for all living organisms on this
planet. Survival is the most important need to clients who seek help. Reality
therapy/choice theory is one of the few theoretical orientations that address
this basic need. Survival includes food, water, shelter, sex, and relationships. Reality therapists believe that one of the underlying problems in a
client’s life is an unsatisfying relationship. According to Glasser (1998), getting along with people helps our chances for survival. Hence, survival not
only means the acquisition of resources, but it also means the maintenance
of relationships.
The inability to connect is not unfamiliar in counseling theories
(relational-cultural theory, anyone?). But Glasser’s approach to connections
in relationships is different. Glasser believes that it is our behaviors alone
that cause us to experience these disconnections. Reality therapists believe
that we choose our behaviors in relationships. Reality therapists also believe
that we try to meet our perceived needs by use of our total behavior, which
is composed of acting, feeling, thinking, and physiology. When we are not
in control of our total behavior, it can impact our relationships and our
survival.
Glasser has addressed many issues that create conflict in relationships,
such as trying to control someone else’s behavior. Our survival depends
on our behavior and the choices that we make. Reality therapists focus
on current relations rather than previous relationships. However, the past
is not completely rejected (Corey, 2009). This idea is logical considering
that previous events may not necessarily impact a person’s survival if the
past events included problematic behaviors that are still a choice for the
client.

Power
Power is one of the constructs that drives our lives and defines how we see
our lives. Power is what we seek in relations. And the power that we do not
have in our relationship makes us feel powerless. Being powerless may lead
to feelings of weakness and inadequacy. These feelings will without a doubt
impact a person negatively, which will lead to an unsatisfactory relationship
for not only the person who perceives themselves as powerless, but also for
the person who is seen as having all of the power.
The battle of power can be seen in many different types of relationships. These relationships can include and are not restricted to familial
relationships, romantic relationships, platonic friendships, and business relationships. When a power differential exists, it will almost always lead to
unhappiness. According to Glasser, “to be powerful is to achieve, to be competent, to be skilled, to be recognized for our achievement and skill, to be
listened to and have a sense of self-worth” (Glasser, 1998, p. 29). Henceforth,
power is obtainable and fostered. Power can also be shared among individuals. For power to be shared among individuals, we have to listen to one
another. As stated by Glasser, “If no one listens to us, we feel the pain of the
powerlessness, the kind of pain you feel in a foreign country when you are
trying to get information and no one speaks your language” (Glasser, 1998,
p. 31).

Freedom
Freedom is similar to power, but freedom includes the feeling of not being
restricted. Freedom allows us to choose to think, act, and believe in what we
want. America was built on the idea of freedom from the rule of England.
Freedom is expressed explicitly in the U.S. Constitution and Bill of Rights.
Freedom can be seen as the reason for why America has engaged in so
many wars (i.e., our personal freedom or the freedom of others). Freedom
may be hard to differentiate between rights and independence; however,
freedom as a construct resonates with the American psyche more than any
of its synonyms. Glasser describes the need for freedom in the context of
mental health as such: “[T]hat the need for freedom is evolutions’ attempt to
provide the correct balance between your need to try to force me to live my
life the way you want and my need to be free of that force” (Glasser, 1998,
p. 40).
Freedom resonates with people of all ages (children, adolescents, people in troubled relationships, film goers, etc.). Without freedom, we feel
depressed and anxious. Glasser’s construct may seem axiomatic; however, it
is crucial to both our relationships and our happiness.
Freedom, although not singular to America, is a construct that is deeply
embedded in the psyche of America and has been since the American
Revolution. No superhero in comic books embodies the ideals of America
more than Captain America. According to Glasser, “[F]reedom is the need for
independence, autonomy, to have choices and be able to take control of the
direction of one’s life,” which Steve Rogers/Captain America does throughout the film Captain America: The First Avenger (Feige & Johnston, 2011),
which students and clients will be able to see (Glasser, 1998, p. 31).

Love and Belonging
Love is the main ingredient in every healthy relationship. Love is the universal feeling that people have that can be described as a feeling of great
concern for something or someone. Human beings are driven to find love,
and when they do, they are driven to maintain that love. People who are
in loving relationships want to duplicate that feeling of love in other relationships. Glasser’s construct of love is not restricted to romantic love or
friendship but is a general feeling of love. In Glasser’s book Choice Theory:
A New Psychology of Personal Freedom, he groups love, loving sex, and
belonging as one individual need. However, in this article, I will separate
love and belonging.
Love in the Marvel Cinematic Universe is the love between Tony Stark
and Pepper Potts in Iron Man (Arad, Feige, et al., 2008) and Iron Man 2
(Feige & Favreau, 2010). Love is the feeling between Bruce Banner and Betty
Ross in The Incredible Hulk (Arad, Hurd, Feige, & Leterrier, 2008). Love is the
feeling between Thor and Jane Foster in Thor (Feige & Branagh, 2011). Love
is the feeling between Steve Rogers/Captain America and Peggy Carter in
Captain America: First Avenger (Feige & Johnston, 2011). The relationships
between all of these characters can be described as romantic love, but it is
nevertheless love.
The type of love that is similar to belonging is the love that is seen in
the film Avengers (Feige & Whedon, 2012). The characters share a love for
each other that may not be necessarily romantic, but it is nevertheless love.
Glasser’s construct of belonging can also be seen among the characters who
ultimately choose to be with each other and accomplish one goal as opposed
to doing things individually. Students and clients watching the films can also
extrapolate that the characters belong in each other’s lives as they do in the
comics.

Quality World in the Marvel Universe
The quality world is the Shangri-La in which we want to live. Glasser
describes the quality world as a picture album, an ideal world where people
are not under the control of external control. Thor, Captain America, Iron
Man, and Hulk can live in both worlds simultaneously (i.e., quality world
and the Marvel Cinematic Universe). In the Marvel Cinematic Universe and
each other’s quality world, the Avengers Initiative could be seen as attempt
to create a quality community. The final image we see in The Avengers (Feige
& Whedon, 2012) is all of the Avengers members eating and possibly reflecting on the adventure they had. For the audience, this moment is comical
and shows that with all the power and responsibility they have, they are still
just people (with the exception of Thor). For the characters in this film, this
moment could be one they would put in each of their own photo albums.

ILLUSTRATIONS
Iron Man and Iron Man 2
Tony Stark is Iron Man. He is also a billionaire playboy with genius-level
intellect. In the first few moments of Iron Man (Arad, Feige, et al., 2008),
we see Tony Stark enjoying his wealth and influence shortly before being
attacked by terrorists in a military convoy. Moments later, he is held captive by the terrorist group and is separated from his friends and associates.
To make Tony Stark’s situation worse, he is wounded with a piece of shrapnel that is slowly migrating toward his heart. The terrorist group that attacked
the military convoy, the Ten Rings, demands that he make a weapon for
them, but instead, Tony Stark decides to make a suit to help him escape and
to keep him alive. Throughout the film, he fights terrorists and other global
threats using his suit. At the end of Iron Man (Arad, Feige, et al., 2008), Tony
Stark admits that he is Iron Man to the public. Also, in the first moments of
the Iron Man sequel, Iron Man 2 (Feige & Favreau, 2010), we see Tony Stark
having fun by celebrating with large crowds and racing cars while accepting
who he is to the world. In these moments, he is enjoying being both Tony
Stark and Iron Man, which is congruency in all senses of the word (i.e., his
acting and thinking match his feelings). Tony Stark/Iron Man in both films
has fun and creates throughout both films.

The Incredible Hulk
The Incredible Hulk (Arad, Hurd, et al., 2008) is about a world-renowned
gamma scientist, Bruce Banner, who accidently transforms himself into an
incredible green hulking monster who is able to lift more than 100 tons when
angered or when his blood pressure is more than 200. Bruce Banner/the
Incredible Hulk spends the entire film avoiding escape from the government.
In the beginning of the film, we see Dr. Bruce Banner trying to survive in
the favelas of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, by earning a meager living working
in a bottling factory. Banner is also seeking a cure that will rid him of his
green destructive alter ego that the U.S. government wants to capture or kill,
the Incredible Hulk. Although Hulk is strong and nearly indestructible, he
must survive several threats to his life and the lives of those he cares about.
Throughout the film, Banner is trying to survive without being caught by the
military. Hence, the film is about survival.

Thor
In the film Thor (Feige & Branagh, 2011), Thor is a warrior prince of Asgard
who is a hero and future ruler to his people. The king of Asgard, and Thor’s
father, Odin spends much of the film trying to maintain control over his sons,
arrogant Thor and the mischievous Loki, and the threats that exist around
his kingdom. Thor wields a certain amount of power because of his prowess
as a warrior on the battle field and his being a member of the royal family
(social position). Additionally, the greatest source of power that Thor has
comes from his hammer, Mjolnir, which translates into “The Crusher.” In the
film, Thor is sent to Earth as a mortal and is stripped of his power (i.e.,
royal social standing and god-like physicality) by his father Odin because
of his callowness and arrogance. Although Thor does not have his god-like
ability or his hammer throughout most of the film, he is not completely
powerless. Thor spends much of the film trying to reclaim his power from
his power-hungry brother Loki. We also see Thor working with the mortals
instead of using power over them.

Captain America: The First Avenger
The film Captain America: The First Avenger (Feige & Johnston, 2011) opens
with a very skinny Steve Rogers trying to enlist in the military to fight
the Nazis during World War II. Viewers see Steve Rogers being rejected
from military services for various reasons. Steve Rogers is given approval
to join the military with the help of a scientist by the name of Dr. Abraham
Erskine who later gives him the super solider serum. The super solider serum
transforms skinny Steve Rogers into the iconic Captain America, who has
existed in Marvel Comics since the 1930s. Throughout the film, we see Steve
Rogers as Captain America committing heroic deeds and fighting the threat of
Schmidt/Red Skull until the icy end. Henceforth, the film Captain America:
The First Avenger (Feige & Johnston, 2011) is truly about Glasser’s construct
of freedom.

The Avengers
In the final film of Phase 1 of the Marvel Cinematic Universe, all of the
heroes of the previous film unite to stop Thor’s brother Loki and a group
of evil aliens from taking over the Earth. This film brings Thor, Iron Man,
the Hulk, and Captain America all together to stop Loki and the aliens from
destroying New York and, possibly, Earth. Toward the end, they realize in
battle that they all need each other. At the end of the film, all of the characters
decide to become a super group called the Avengers who will team up once
again if there is ever a threat that could destroy the Earth.

APPLICATION
Teaching Reality Therapy/Choice Theory
Teaching reality therapy/choice theory to students should begin with an
introduction of Glasser’s constructs (fun, freedom, survival, power, and
love-belonging). Students should be able to understand the key concepts
(motivation, external forces) as they relate to the view of human nature
before watching the films. The quality world should be explained to students as the world in which we want to live. In all of the films used in this
article, the ideal world is an ideal place for the heroes, with the exception
of Bruce Banner. Counselor educators using the films can use Steve Rogers’s
difficulties adapting to a time in which he was not supposed to exist as
an example of someone struggling with his or her world. This struggle can
also be illustrated with Thor, an alien to the world in which he is forced to
become a part.
Total behavior should be explained as integral to choice theory. Choice
theory explains that all behaviors are made up of acting, thinking, feeling,
and physiology (Corey, 2009). Counselor educators can provide examples
using the films to illustrate how these behaviors impact us (e.g., Bruce
Banner attempting to control his physiology). Reality therapists believe in
choices and responsibility, two beliefs expressed throughout the Marvel
Cinematic Universe. These two beliefs are central in helping clients connect
to the kind of people they want in their quality worlds. Reality therapists also
work with clients to help them understand and fulfill their needs.
When working with clients, it is best to understand the total behavior
of the client, which includes their acting, thinking, feeling, and physiology.
These four components are both purposeful and present at all times. Reality
therapists may even help their clients create new behaviors that will help
them lead more satisfying lives. Reality therapists should evaluate their clients
in regards to their wants and perceptions. Choice theory, which underlies the
choice of all behavior, is part of all clients’ perspectives and their behaviors.
Being able to translate concepts and principles, which may seem easy,
“takes considerable skill and creativity” (Corey, 2009 p. 323). Reality therapists who decide to use this creative therapeutic intervention may want
something that is more “step by step.” This creative intervention, however, allows the therapist to be a creative teacher and mentor for clients.
Cinematherapy techniques allow for an easier facilitation of constructs that
may appear simple but reinforce the idea that these themes in life are truly
universal and can create difficulties for even the greatest of heroes. Students
and clients may be able to marvel at human nature and the behaviors that
appear on screen.

CONCLUSIONS
One of the benefits of pairing the Marvel Cinematic Universe with Glasser’s
reality therapy/choice theory is that much of the research conducted by
Glasser has addressed youth. Adopting cinematherapy—and more specifically, superhero films—could be effective when working with adolescents.
Adolescents can learn about taking responsibility and developing an internal
locus of control after watching these films. All of the films in the Marvel
Cinematic Universe are rated PG, so these films should be discussed with
parents of adolescents before viewing. Although some constructs and concepts are better suited for adults, adolescents will face these themes as they
mature. This theoretically driven article provides suggestions on how to use
these films with clients and students. Researchers of future studies many
want to examine the long-term effects of cinematherapy with clients and
document empirically the extent to which the approach is useful.
