doi: 10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x
THE ECONOMICS OF MOVIES:
A LITERATURE SURVEY
Jordi McKenzie
University of Sydney
Abstract. The film industry provides a myriad of interesting problems for economic contemplation.
From the initial concept of an idea through production, distribution and finally exhibition there
are many aspects to the film project and the film industry that present new and interesting puzzles
worthy of investigation. Add to this the high level of data availability, and it is little wonder that an
increasing number of researchers are being attracted to this industry. To date, however, there are no
comprehensive surveys on the contribution of economists to this literature. This paper attempts to
fill this void and unify what is known about the industry. It also identifies and discusses potential
areas for new research.
Keywords. Motion picture industry; Motion pictures
1. Introduction
Over the last two decades the motion picture industry has generated a growing collection of academic
research. The complexity of the production process, the unique features of distribution and exhibition,
and the uncertain nature of demand provides researchers many interesting problems worthy of
investigation. Add to this the fact that there are many rich data sources available (some highly accessible,
others less so) and it is little wonder applied researchers are being increasingly attracted to this industry.
This paper endeavours to provide a comprehensive and up-to-date survey of the literature which
has emerged on economic issues related to motion pictures and the motion picture industry. To date
there have been a number of number of very good books, book sections and at least one journal
article that have both explained and surveyed the literature on the industry. For example, books such as
Litman (1998), Caves (2000), Squire (2003) and Vogel (2007) provide detailed description and analysis
of the industry – often with contributions from respected industry experts and professionals. Books
which have assembled series of academic papers on economic/marketing issues relevant to the industry
include De Vany (2004) and Moul (2005). As well there have been a number of survey type articles
within broader volumes such as Chisholm (2003) in A Handbook of Cultural Economics (Towse, ed.),
De Vany (2006) in Handbook of the Economics of Art and Culture (Ginsburgh and Throsby, eds) and
Walls (2008a) in The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (Durlauf and Blume, eds). In the context
of journal surveys related to the industry, the study Eliashberg et al. (2006) provides a comprehensive
synthesis of the marketing literature also with discussion of a number of studies more oriented towards
economists’ interests.1
Although much literature is referenced within the collection of works just cited, most of it applies
outside the usual domain of economic academia and the ‘surveys’ between them cover only a relatively
small amount of the rapidly expanding body of scholarly research written about the industry.2 This
survey throws a wider net and assembles a significantly larger collection of published research which
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70 C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden,
MA 02148, USA.
THE ECONOMICS OF MOVIES 43
is inherently economic in focus. This also implies the study refrains from discussing (in detail) other
disciplines’ research efforts of recent years.3 The main goals of this survey are therefore to bring
together a large volume of economic research specifically written about the motion picture industry,
and to do so in a structured and coherent way such that those new, or even familiar, with the literature
of this area may have a useful source of referral.
This study is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief overview of the industry’s history
and related literature in relation to the studio era and the historic anti-trust cases of the late 1940s
and early 1950s. Section 3 is the most extensive section and details literature which can be broadly
categorized as ‘microeconomic’ with respect to individual film demand (including a discussion of the
role of stars, reviews, awards, ratings and genre), production, distribution and exhibition. Section 4
surveys research with a more ‘macroeconomic’ focus where, for example, aggregate patterns of cinema
attendance (rather than individual film attendance) is the unit of analysis. Finally, Section 5 provides a
concluding discussion and identifies some directions for future research.
2. Some History4
The history of the motion picture industry goes back to Edison’s invention of the kinetograph (motion
picture camera) and kinetoscope (viewing machine) in 1894. Within a decade or so projectors were
developed and short ‘one-reel’ films had begun screening at ‘nickelodeon’ theatres – known as such
because of admission costing a nickel. These silent one-reel films had very simple storylines and a night
at the nickelodeon typically included a selection of one-reel films of different genres and newsreels.
Through the early 1910s, two-reel films replaced one-reel films, which were subsequently replaced by
feature length films. By the late 1920s films had sound and were popularly referred to as ‘talkies’.
Studios (many which are the same as today) had also begun operations and were operating their own
‘deluxe’ theatres in a number of major cities. In 1933, after the Great Depression, the ‘Code of Fair
Conduct’ was drawn up by the Motion Picture Producers and Distributors of America which allowed
a number of economic stabilization practices including block-booking, blind-selling, time clearances,
zoning and admission price discrimination. Only 2 years later, however, the explicit nature of these
practices was banned, yet tacitly they remained in place.
During the late 1930s five of the major studios were accused of deliberately attempting to eliminate
the remaining independents from the industry by tactics such as price fixing and restricting supply.
This led to a series of Department of Justice antitrust actions that ultimately led the Supreme Court to
radically change the structure and practices of the industry in 1948 through the Paramount Antitrust
and consent decrees in which the studio/distributors were ordered to divest of their cinema interests
and change a number of their business practices. The courts banned integration between distribution
and exhibition and banned terms in contracts which implied integration. The courts also banned certain
methods for allocating films including block-booking and blind-selling, requiring features to be licensed
individually, one theatre at a time, to a wider group of exhibitors. Long-term relationships, franchises,
multiple-film licences and admission price fixing were also forbidden. The courts concluded that the
vertically integrated structure of the industry did not fit the reigning theory of competition.
Numerous scholars have discussed the appropriateness of the courts’ decisions since this time. In
particular, the case study of De Vany and Eckert (1991) provides an insightful and detailed analysis
of the courts’ rulings in light of economic theory.5 These authors argue against the courts’ decisions,
posing that the industry’s structure and its licensing practices were reasonable ways for dealing with
the problems that arose from four characteristics of the industry’s product: (1) each motion picture is
unique and cannot be duplicated, (2) demand is unpredictable, (3) a motion picture needs time on the
screen to build an audience, and (4) most of the costs of production and distribution occur before a
film can be shown and are sunk. These characteristics, they argue, determined how the industry was
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
44 MCKENZIE
organized at the time of Paramount, where the biggest studios integrated production, distribution and
exhibition under one authority.
Kenney and Klein (1983) also examine an aspect of the Paramount cases in relation to the practice
of block-booking – i.e. licensing several films as a bundle at an average price. Rather than being
merely a subtle form of price discrimination, they contend that block-booking was designed to fix
an over-searching problem that resulted from initial box office revenue information being revealed
between the signing of a contract and the time when the distributor received and had to pay for the
film. In their analysis, they also examine the related practice of blind-selling (where exhibitors do not
view the film before they purchase it) which, they argue, was used to save on inventory costs but led
to the ex post opportunistic behaviour of exhibitors and that block-booking was a way of dealing with
this problem.
Using data on Warner Bros. from 1937 to 1938 of all first run, second run and third run
theatres in Wisconsin, Hanssen (2000) proposes that, rather than Kenney and Klein’s (1983) over￾searching contention, block-booking was used simply to supply greater quantity which exhibitors were
demanding given that there was ample evidence of exhibitors still rejecting certain titles under blocking
arrangements. But while acknowledging this observation as true, in rebuttal Kenney and Klein (2000)
add to their earlier arguments by stressing the role of ‘reputational capital’ of the distributor being
important in enforcing contractual flexibility, i.e. a reputation for providing films of an acceptable
quality. They explain block-booking within this framework by its effects on reducing the variance in
the value of the film package and, therefore, the demands placed on the distributors’ reputational capital.
In a study with particularly rich data, Blumenthal (1988) provides a useful empirical examination of
blind-selling – a practice which, although banned by the US Supreme Court 1948, eventually re-emerged
in the industry. Using actual contract data, she describes an auction framework where exhibitors are
blind (i.e. have constrained information) and proposes an error components model to investigate a
data set which includes the terms and experiences of 18 films licensed to a national circuit by three
major distributors in the USA from January to September 1982. The empirical component of her study
considers the exhibitors bid and returns (separately) as functions of cinema density, contractual house￾nut, production budget, number of simultaneous film openings and (of most importance to her study) a
dummy variable of whether or not the auction was blind. Her results show that blind exhibitors reduce
their bids (implying they increase their mean returns); however, in doing so they assume more variance
as a result. Overall though, the increase in mean does not offset the increased variance and exhibitors
suffer a loss of expected utility as a result, which may in turn explain the increased legislative actions
initiated by exhibitors.
Other researchers considering the historical aspects of the industry have compared the demand
conditions and overall profitability of the industry in the pre-Paramount era to that of today. Building
on some of their earlier work,6 Pokorny and Sedgwick (2010) examine the profit trends in Hollywood
using data from the 1930s and 1990s. The 1930s data they examine are actual studio ledger data from
MGM, RKO and Warner Bros. covering 1796 films, whereas the data from the 1990s is standard
Nielsen EDI covering 2116 films. These authors develop a measure of profit which includes actual
rental incomes, distribution costs and production costs in the 1930s sample. They also compensate for
ancillary revenues in the 1990s sample by apportioning theatrical’s share of costs to profits to provide
a comparable measure with the 1930s sample – although these are estimated from averages reported
by Vogel (2007) which somewhat weakens the analysis in relation to their rich 1930s data. Their
results show that similar levels of variability existed in both periods, but in the 1930s the main source
of profits were from low to medium budget films, whereas in 1990s it was high budget films that
generated the higher proportion of revenues. For example, they show that films costing three times the
annual average accounted for about 14% of production budgets during both periods, but in the 1930s
generated about 3.6% of total profits whereas in the 1990s this proportion was almost 20% – providing
some evidence of increasing returns to production budget spending. They interpret (increasingly) high
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
THE ECONOMICS OF MOVIES 45
budgets in the 1930s as experimental and even ‘vanity projects’, but also note that institutional features
(such as short runs) might have played a role. Their results support that notion that while individual
film performance is unpredictable, the portfolio approach and learning which types of films to invest
in has helped to maintain Hollywood’s edge.
3. Movie Microeconomics
Much like general microeconomics, movie microeconomics deals broadly with problems related to an
individual entity such as the film project itself, the individuals/institutions associated with the film
project, or the deals done in relation to the film project, rather than problems more relevant to the
industry at an aggregate level. As such this section focuses firstly on the demand for individual films,
where it is impossible to proceed without discussion of the uncertainty inherent in understanding
demand, and includes discussion of the role that stars, critics, awards, ratings and genres have on
demand. Although the various studies discussed are structured around these sub-headings, it is an
inherently subjective exercise to the group research this way and the headings are intended to serve
merely as a guide and not a definitive classification as often studies transcend these categorizations.
With this in mind, the following sub-sections on ‘Production’, ‘Distribution’ and ‘Exhibition’ also have
some degree of subjectiveness in their classification – obviously grouping in this way is an intuitively
appealing way in which to describe the various stages of film development to final consumption, even
if the research lines are sometimes blurred.
3.1 Demand and Uncertainty
Many empirical papers are now accumulating which deal broadly with the demand for individual films.
Without suggesting that these research efforts are not establishing original and informative results,
the common approach of a number of these empirical studies is to model individual film revenue (or
attendance) as a function of a set of film specific explanatory variables which may include budget, screen
counts, advertising, awards, reviews, star power, genre, ratings etc. among other variables. Although
statistically significant and intuitive results are frequently observed, there is a growing realization that
the specification of such models requires special attention due to complications such as heavy tailed
revenue distributions, and potentially endogenous right hand side variables.
Prag and Casavant (1994) were some earliest researches to investigate the determinants of box office
revenues using a number of the explanatory variables similar to those mentioned above. Their data set
covers a sample 652 films released in the US market over a large number of years. The covariates they
consider include budget, quality (critical reviews), star, sequel, award, genre and rating. In addition,
they investigate a sub-sample of 195 titles for which they also observe advertising data. Their regression
results reveal positive effects of budget, quality, star, sequel and award, but when advertising is included
only quality remains significant. Subsequently they examine the determinants of marketing expenditure
using the explanatory variables of budget, quality, star, sequel, award, genre and rating. They observe
(positive) significance on budget, star, award and genres of action and comedy, and argue that it is not
surprising that some variables lose significance when prints and advertising were added given that star,
awards and budgets all impact on revenue indirectly through advertising. Although not directly stated
by these authors, their results highlight strongly the endogenous nature of the advertising variable
(i.e. box office revenue films are likely to be associated with higher of advertising) as well as the
difficulties with interpreting coefficients with collinear independent variables – for example, budget
and advertising are typically highly correlated.
A more recent study to examine and econometrically account for the subtle intricacies of demand
(and supply) in relation to film covariates is Elberse and Eliashberg (2003) who use weekly revenue
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
46 MCKENZIE
and screen data on the USA, France, Germany, Spain and the UK in a simultaneous equation model
of demand and supply dynamics. Their data set includes 164 titles which were released in 1999 and
featured at least once in the top 25 of the US charts. They model weekly revenue as function of screens
that week and other time variant and (for the first week only) time invariant variables. The time variant
variables include word-of-mouth (weekly screen average), competing films and season, whereas time
invariant variables include star appeal, director appeal and advertising expenditure. On the supply side
they model weekly screen allocation decisions as a function of expected revenue for that week. They
use Hollywood Stock Exchange (HSX) price data as a week one proxy for expected revenue, and
in subsequent weeks use an exponential smoothing procedure in which last week’s anticipated value
is updated by a fraction of the prediction error. Their supply model also includes time variant and
time invariant variables similar to those of the demand model and, in the case of foreign markets,
also a release time-lag variable from the US market. The results show evidence that several variables,
usually assumed to influence revenues directly, influence revenues through the allocation of screens
(e.g. advertising). For all markets, screens are the main determinant of revenues, and expected revenues
are the main determinants of screens. They also show that advertising is the main predictor of opening
week screens and revenues, and word-of-mouth is important subsequent weeks. Another finding is of an
inverse relationship between the domestic-to-foreign release time-lag and foreign box office revenues
– suggesting that word-of-mouth momentum may run out if distributors delay a release for too long
between the two markets.
An interesting feature of motion picture demand is the way in which consumers’ interact and the
resulting effect on patterns of box office revenues. In a series of papers De Vany and Walls (1996,
1997, 1999, 2004) extensively explore the dynamics of demand, the resulting statistical distributions
of revenues/profits, and the implications for the practices of the industry.7 De Vany and Walls (1996)
investigate the information cascade effects caused by word-of-mouth interactions about a particular film.
Using a sample of 300 films from Variety’s top 50 released 1985–1986, they liken the information
cascade effects to the Bose–Einstein model of physics where information feedback has the potential to
generate extreme box office ‘hits’ and ‘flops’. Their model shows that the revenue distribution evolves
recursively over the run of the film as a mixture of opening and stochastic competition between films.
They show that the resulting distribution has heavier tails than the log-normal distribution and, further,
that it violates an exact form of the Pareto law implying an auto-correlated pattern in the growth of
revenues which they interpret as ‘increasing returns to information’.8
In subsequent research, De Vany and Walls (1997) investigate the number of weeks spent in Variety’s
top 50 for a sample of 350 films released between 1985 and 1986. They model the duration using a
Weibull survival model in relation to a vector of explanatory variables including first run bookings,
the week’s revenue, the number of weeks already in top 50, the rank in top 50, and the number of
showcases a film played in when it debuted. Although all are shown to be statistically significant, they
declare only first runs to be economically significant to the magnitude of increasing a run by 11.3%
for a 1% increase in first runs. Walls (1998) also utilizes a Weibull survival model on a sample of
493 films that played in the Hong Kong market between 1994 and 1996. Using the number of weeks
spent in Variety’s top 10, he considers the role of opening week revenues and whether the film was in
Chinese or English and finds opening week revenue positively impacts on life-length whereas Chinese
films generally enjoy a shorter life at the Hong Kong box office.
De Vany and Walls (1999) again consider the mathematical properties of box office revenue (and
estimated profit) data of 2015 motion pictures released between 1985 and 1996. They show that the
revenues are Levy stable distributed with extreme skew and theoretically infinite variance. They argue
there is no typical movie because box office revenue outcomes diverge over all values. In reaching this
finding they evaluate the impact of budget, star power (actors and director), sequels, genre, rating and
release year on ‘hit’ probability in a binary dependent variable framework, where a hit is defined as
a movie grossing over US$50 million. They find it impossible to attribute the success of a movie to
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
THE ECONOMICS OF MOVIES 47
individual causal factors showing that the audience reception (captured by a dummy variable for films
lasting greater than 10 weeks) is the most important variable in determining box office revenues.
Utilizing the same data as De Vany and Walls (1999), De Vany and Walls (2004) show the stable
Paretian distribution to provide a strong account of (unconditional) profits in the industry, extending
their earlier findings relating to revenues. They find support for the ‘nobody knows anything’ principle
as evidenced by the (theoretic) infinite variance of the profit distribution – a property of the stable
Paretian distribution. They also note statistical evidence consistent with what they term the ‘angel’s
nightmare’, which is observed when excess over a film’s budget leads to a final cost that is proportional
to the cost already expended. Further, they show support for the ‘curse of the superstar’ which is a
consequence of the skew of the profit distribution for films with stars, which translated implies that if
a star is paid their expected profit, the movie will generally lose money.
Collins et al. (2002) also examine the statistical revenue distribution of a sample of 216 films
released in the UK 1998–1999 and similarly show that film revenues in their sample are characterized
by unbounded variance. Following the research of De Vany and Walls (1999) they investigate the tail
parameter of the revenue distribution using regression techniques, Hill plots and the stable distribution
(quantile) estimators. They find differing values of the tail weight parameter using the different
techniques, but are able to establish that the distribution is characterized by theoretically infinite
variance. Owing to the non-normal revenue distribution, they subsequently employ a binary dependent
variable logit model on four revenue threshold levels to show that star power and good reviews help
success, but the impact is far from certain as represented by large standard errors of the estimated
parameters.
Building on his earlier work with De Vany, Walls (2005a) applies a skew-normal and skew-t model
to modelling a sample of 1989 films released in the USA between 1985 and 1996. His basic regression
structure models revenue as a function of budget, star power, sequel, opening screens, genre and rating
where the disturbance term follows a (log) skew-normal, or (log) skew-t distribution. He compares
the results to standard log-linear and minimum absolute deviation models. The statistical evidence
rejects the log-normal model and shows that coefficients differ significantly between the two sets of
specifications – in particular, the effect of opening week screens is less in the skew-normal and skew-t
models. He also argues that the skew-t is intuitively (more) appealing because it not only includes
skew but heavy tails, and is a good practical approximation to the asymmetric stable regression.
Using the same data and in a similar contextual framework to Walls (2005a), Walls (2005b) uses
the symmetric stable distribution to account for heavy tails of the revenue distribution in a regression
framework. He also applies a robust bounded influence regression (which gives less weight to outliers)
and a trimmed least squares procedure (which omits the top and bottom 5% of observations) for
comparison and observes that coefficient of budget and star are statistically different between the least
squares model and the stable model, but not opening week screens or sequel. The estimates also reveal
that the impact of a star is higher in the ordinary least squares (OLS) model implying that, if they
were to be paid their true value, the film would lose money. As a practical point, he notes that the
bounded influence regression provides a useful approximation to the stable regression but the trimmed
least squares may perform poorly because it cuts out observations which actually should be included
as they are not actually residual outliers.
Walls (2005c) revisits the rank-revenue model of De Vany and Walls (1996) and shows that a
stretched exponential (Weibull) does a better job of fitting the data than the parabolic power law
originally presented using the same data described above. The stretched exponential models revenue,
raised to a power, against log rank, where the power parameter has the practical interpretation of
amount that the empirical distribution’s argument is ‘powered-up’ before it is exponentiated. This is
consistent with a model of consumer demand where shocks are multiplicative and there is (eventual)
saturation in demand.
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
48 MCKENZIE
In one of the recent number of papers pursuing a discrete choice approach to modelling movie
demand, Moul (2007) also investigates the word-of-mouth effect and saturation consequences on
demand using a nested logit model where word-of-mouth presents through the heteroskedasticity and
serial correlation in the error term of the model. His panel data set covers 1602 titles reported in
Variety’s weekly top 50 from 1990 to 1996. The results of his thoughtful analysis suggest that word￾of-mouth represents approximately 10% of variation in consumer expectations and that information
appears to reach the average consumer quickly. He also identifies that movies with low expectations
find it harder to capitalize on word-of-mouth than movies with high expectations
Using data on the Australian industry, McKenzie (2008, 2009) provides evidence on word-of-mouth
and the interaction of demand and supply at the national level. Presenting a model similar to that of De
Vany and Walls (1996), McKenzie (2008) provides evidence that the box office revenue distribution
is characterized by thick right tails that are more extreme than a log-normal distribution and have
theoretically infinite variance. Using a sample of 2429 films, he observes this not only for the entire
sample, but also for a number of sub-samples disaggregated by opening week number of screens.
Further, he shows that weekly screen average revenue distributions similarly reject log-normality,
have theoretically infinite variance, and that the probability mass in the (right) tail of the weekly
screen average distribution increases until week six and then decreases. He explains this finding as a
consequence of word-of-mouth effects where consumers share information about films they like over
early weeks and a bifurcation effect begins since films are contractually obligated to theatres for the
minimum run period. Once this period ends, however, poor performing films are dropped and there is
less divergence across the distribution and as a result there is less probability mass in the right tail.
McKenzie (2009) employs a survival analysis (with unobserved heterogeneity) to investigate word￾of-mouth with respect to the number of weeks in which a film plays in the weekly Australian box
office charts. His analysis considers a number of film specific covariates relating to the production
characteristics of the film (budget, star power, re-release, sequel, genre and rating), consumer signals
(US revenue and critical reviews), and strategic distribution variables (previewing, advertising, opening
week screens, and release gap with the US market). Using data on 360 wide-release films released
over the years 2000–2005, he provides evidence that box office life-length responds to previewing,
advertising, critical reviews and US box office – but not to production budget, star power or opening
week screens.
3.1.1 The Role of Stars
Stars are a long-standing feature of the movie business and the top ones command large salaries.
Empirical researchers commonly include a ‘star’ variable, among others, in their attempts to explain
box office success. Quantifying a star’s impact, however, is an inherently subjective exercise and there
have been many different approaches adopted from examining the actor’s box office history, their
award history, or appearances on industry ‘power’ or ‘hit’ lists (of which there are a number) among
other methods. Rather than discuss how different researchers have measured star power, however, this
section focuses on ‘how’ and ‘why’ stars play such an important role in the movie business.
Albert (1998) examines the role of stars and argues that although stars are important, particularly
in getting a film financed, they by no means guarantee success. His model suggests that stars are
important not only because they attract a group of fans, but because they are least noisy and most
consistent ‘marker’ for successful films. As an example he suggests that the actor Clint Eastwood,
either through talent, ability to choose or ability to acquire investment, is a marker of successful films
which can then be characterized as a film type. The theoretical context of his model is based on the
famous Yule–Simon skew distribution, which is also related to the De Vany and Walls (1996) model
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
THE ECONOMICS OF MOVIES 49
of revenue dynamics.9 His analysis considers the top 20 films released between 1969 and 1995 over
which time 283 different ‘film types’ (actors) are observed. Of these 155 had one such film, 52 had
two such films, 22 had 3 etc. and 1 had 19 such films (Clint Eastwood). The results suggest that to
produce a successful film it is best to produce a film of a type that has success already attached to it
(marker) – i.e. to hire a star that has been associated with a string of successful films.
Bagella and Becchetti (1999) analyse the determinants of successful Italian movies produced between
1985 and 1996 covering a sample of 977 films and examine how the interaction of star actors and star
directors may contribute towards film success. Using GMM-HAC (generalized method of moments
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent) and quantile regression structures to account for the
skewed nature of total admissions (their dependent variable), they consider a range of explanatory
variables relating to the (ex ante) popularity of director and cast, subsidization, age restrictions, foreign
co-productions, GDP, ticket prices, genre and film production house. Using measures of director and
cast appeal derived from survey analysis, they find a quadratic specification with interaction between
director and cast appeal provides evidence of positive externalities between the two factors – i.e.
in addition to their individual effects there is an effect on revenue which exceeds the sum of the
individual contributions. They also find no evidence of subsidization, foreign co-production, changing
ticket prices, changing GDP or age restrictions affecting attendance, but do note the ‘comic’ genre and
the ‘Filmauro’ production house as having a significant impact on admissions.
Ravid (1999) investigates reasons for employing a star in relation to two hypotheses: (1) ‘rent
capture’, i.e. they are paid the expected value of their contribution, and (2) ‘signalling’ that a film is of
higher quality based on the assumption of a risk averse studio executive, or a film maker, with superior
information about increased chances of success. His data set covers a sample of 175 films released
between 1991 and 1993. The primary dependent variables are domestic (US) revenue, rate-of-return
(revenue/budget, i.e. profitability), international revenue and video revenue. The ‘star’ variables he
considers are whether or not any lead actors had won an Academy Award, whether or not any of the
lead actors had participated in a top 10 grossing film in the last year, whether or not any of the lead
actors had been nominated for an award, the number of awards/nominations and also an ‘unknown’
variable if none of the cast members appeared in any of three major movie reference guides. His
results show that star studded films bring in additional revenues in mean comparison tests, but when
considered in a multivariate regression star impact has no discernible impact, thus cannot support the
signalling hypothesis. Further, the impact of budget appears significant suggesting that spending of any
sort, in general, increases revenues. He also shows that star appeal has no impact on rate-of-return,
both in mean comparison tests and in regression analysis implying non-rejection of the rent capture
hypothesis (i.e. budget and revenue increase proportionally).
Elberse (2007) has examined the contributions of stars to movie success using the online fantasy
HSX market as her primary data source. Using data on 1200 casting decisions (covering approximately
600 actors and 500 movies) combined with ‘Movie-Stock’ and ‘Star-Bond’ data from the HSX she
uses an event study framework to compare movies’ expected performance before and after a casting
announcement. Her findings suggest that enlisting (delisting) a star causes the average HSX price
to increase (decrease) by about H$3, which translates to a gain (loss) of approximately US$3m in
expected box office revenue over the first 4 weeks of a film’s run. She also investigates the magnitude
of the individual casting announcements on the HSX price in relation to a number of explanatory
variables including the star’s economic (box office) and artistic (nominations/awards) history, the
economic/artistic history of the supporting cast as well as interactions of the star with cast. She finds
that the star’s prior performance in both an economic and artistic sense is a significantly important
determinant and also that the number of prior performances of other cast members positively affects
the size of the HSX response. She also investigates whether stars have any impact on the net worth,
or valuation, of the specific film studio they represent but finds no evidence of any value-adding
supporting the idea that stars capture their rents.
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
50 MCKENZIE
3.1.2 The Role of Critics and Reviews
Professional certifiers play an important role in many industries, and this is certainly true in the motion
picture industry. In the USA, for example, there is evidence that one-third of moviegoers seek out the
advice of a professional critic before going to the cinema and that one in three chooses a film because
of a favourable review.10 In a contribution that generated a series of related papers, Eliashberg and
Shugan (1997) consider the role of the critic as an ‘influencer’, whose reviews have causality effects
of increased patronage, versus ‘predictor’, whose reviews serve merely as indicator of what films
audiences will enjoy and patronize. The methodological framework they present is that the influencer’s
reviews should correlate more with early box office revenues (under the assumption that this effect
would die out in later weeks), against the role of a predictor whose reviews should correlate more with
later box office and/or cumulative revenues. They use US data from 1991 to 1992 on weekly revenues,
and review data from Variety which classified reviews as ‘pro’, ‘con’ or ‘mixed’. In total their data
set covers 2104 reviews for 172 movies. They find support for the predictor perspective given that
the effect of positive reviews appears stronger at later weeks of a film’s run, but they do stress some
caution of their results given the difficulty in disentangling correlation from causality.
Basuroy et al. (2003) also investigate the role of critics as influencer or predictor. Using primarily the
same data as Ravid (1999) – augmented with data on average nature of review (according to Variety’s
pro, mixed and con assessment), the proportion of good reviews, the number of reviews and variance
of the reviews – they investigate a sample of 172 films observed by 141 critics. Their results show that
the effect of a bad reviews decreases over time and that a ‘negativity bias’ exists where bad reviews
hurt more than a good review helps. They also observe that stars and big budgets help films which have
received a negative review, but there is not as much of an effect on films which receive a good review.
Ravid et al. (2006) further investigate the role of critics by focusing on the following questions:
(1) to what extent critics’ views are biased on particular studios/distributors, (2) whether viewers are
able to distinguish between non-biased and biased distributors and avoid biased distributors and (3)
how distributor bias varies with the reputation/experience of the critic. Using the same data as the
earlier studies of Ravid (1999), and Basuroy et al. (2003), their results show that certain studios affect
the nature of reviews, big budget films earn more reviews which are more likely to be negative, and
star studded films earn more positive reviews. They also examine individual critics’ responses (for
those who reviewed at least 35 films) and averaged distributor coefficients across distributors to assess
bias showing that a bias does exist with some reviewers to certain distributors. Further, they provide
evidence that, against expectation, biased reviewers actually correlate with higher box office revenues
in domestic and international markets suggesting that audiences respond to biased critics. Another
finding of their study is that critics based in L.A. are more biased towards giving a positive review
and conjecture that the network of producers, actors, distributors etc. residing in L.A. may provide an
explanation for the corporate bias observed.
Gemser et al. (2007) also investigate the predictor versus influencer effect with a specific focus on
art-house films versus mainstream films. Their study focuses on 84 films released between 1998 and
2003 in Dutch cinemas. They use the ‘nature of review’ and the ‘size of review’ and weight these
by the circulation of 13 daily Dutch newspapers. They find evidence that reviews have an (influence)
effect on art-house demand, but no such effect on mainstream demand yet they do have a prediction
effect. They show, however, that this only holds true for the size and number of reviews and not their
nature – suggesting that coverage of any sort is better than no coverage at all.
In an insightful study Reinstein and Snyder (2005) also consider the prediction versus influence effect
of reviews by exploiting the timing of the review in relation to the opening weekend box office. They
adopt a ‘difference-in-difference’ approach to purge the prediction effect from the model by noting
that the prediction effect is present both before and after a review announcement, but the influence
effect is only present once the announcement has been made. They combine box office revenue data
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
THE ECONOMICS OF MOVIES 51
of 609 movies with Siskel and Ebert’s reviews (and the date of the review) given that these were
two of the most prominent reviewers over their sample period with a nationally syndicated TV show.
Reviews are categorized as ‘no thumbs up’, ‘one thumb up’ or ‘two thumbs up’. Their results show a
small but significant influence effect which appears more prominent for narrow releases (less than half
median screens) and for drama films – the implication being that reviews are more important for ‘art’
rather than ‘event’ films. They also show that a positive review early in the run increases the audience
as an expansion effect rather than simply shifting demand from later in the run to earlier in the run
at the expense of competing films. When they compare the difference-in-difference approach to the
more traditional method of simply including reviews as an explanatory variable the results suggest a
significant bias that although reduced by the inclusion of additional quality proxy variables, is still
present and overstates the statistical significance of the review effect.
Zuckerman and Kim (2003) investigate another aspect of the relationship between reviewer and
financial success of a film by considering what they term ‘identity assignment’ for a sample of 396
films released in 1997 in the US market. They characterize identity as being dependent upon the type
of critic who reviewed it and characterized it as being ‘fit for the mass market’. That is, when a
critic who specialized in major release films reviewed it favourably, it had potential to ‘break-out’ and
achieve box office success in the mass market; however, they also showed such a favourable rating
handicaps a film from penetrating the art-house market.
Ginsburgh and Weyers (1999) consider another dimension relevant to the role of the reviewer by
focusing on the ‘quality’ of movies as judged by experts (critics, actors, directors etc.), vis-`a-vis quality
as judged by consumers. Their investigation centres around whether quality evaluation are long lasting
by examining (1) the effect of nominations/awards and whether or not they subsequently appear in best
movie lists for the experts and (2) the effect of box office and subsequent frequency of appearance
on TV for consumers. Their data set covers 249 films from 1950 to 1970 that were either included in
the Oscars or Cannes, and/or featured in best movies lists. Their results show that quality assessments
made in Cannes (and to a lesser extent Oscars) are short lasting as films do not frequently appear
on the best movies of all time lists – from the 174 nominations/awards, only 47 belonged to the 122
movies selected as the best of all time. In contrast consumers appear more consistent as box office is
strongly correlated with frequency of TV showings. The results also show that when films come out
there is agreement between experts and consumers (awards and box office are correlated) but this effect
diminishes over time implying that either the two groups value different attributes, or they value them
differently through time. A further finding is that American films dominate in terms of commercial
success and quality, but emphasize being American does not necessarily imply quality per se.
In a related study, Ginsburgh (2003) examines the role of awards, economic success, and aesthetic
quality in a contribution that also examines the book and music industries. His data cover all films
nominated and awarded for ‘best picture’ type awards in a number of prominent film award ceremonies
between 1950 and 1980, and a further set which have appeared in three separate 100 best movie lists
all published in the late 1990s. Combining this information with rental data (i.e. revenues retained by
the distributor) on film success, his results suggest that awards and commercial success are positively
correlated but refrains from implying direct causation from awards to commercial success. The results
also show that the aesthetic judgement of critics on the best movie lists is a significant determinant
of commercial success but is insensitive to the number of lists, yet once awards and nominations are
added only movies which appear on all three lists earn superior revenues. A further observation of the
study is that movie awards often do not go to the best quality movie given that, for example, only 26%
of movies which have one an Oscar for best picture appear on all three best movie lists considered.
In another study concerned with quality assessments of motion pictures, Holbrook (1999) looks at
the popular appeal versus expert judgement paradigm using data compiled from a sample of the 5000
films represented in the popularity polls of viewers conducted by Home Box Office in 1989. From
this, a sample of 1000 movies were selected in a manner that included only films released before
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
52 MCKENZIE
1986, those that had won an Academy Award, those that had been listed as a box office hit and/or
been voted in a top 100 poll by certain key commentators, and others that had been nominated and/or
awarded in various other industry film lists and competitions. He examined two research questions:
(1) do the determinants of ‘popular appeal versus expert judgement’ suggest differing or common
standards of evaluation for consumers versus critics and (2) do discrepant (shared) tastes produce a
negative (positive) correlation between popular appeal and expert judgement. His results suggest that
ordinary consumers and professional critics do emphasize different criteria in the formation of their
tastes and there exists negative correlation between popular appeal and expert judgement.
3.1.3 The Role of Awards and Award Nominations
Every year the film industry holds a number of famous and glamorous award ceremonies (e.g. the
Academy Awards) which also provide mass entertainment unto themselves. There is strong evidence
that award nominations and award wins significantly impact on box office revenues and consequently
distributors are very responsive to them. For example, distributors may alter release dates to improve a
film’s chances of nomination and, if successful, will often use the nomination/award in their marketing
campaigns. It is therefore little wonder that a number of researchers have sought to empirically examine
the effects of nominations and awards on the box office. In what has often been cited as one of the first
empirical studies of the determinants of successful movies to appear in a mainstream economic journal,
Smith and Smith (1986) investigate a sample of film rentals in relation to Academy Awards of best
picture, best actor/actress, best director and total number of awards. Their study considers a sample
of 600 films which they analyse over three sub-samples defined as 1950s and prior, 1960s and 1970s.
The self-admitted ‘preliminary’ analysis provides a number of ‘mixed results’ suggesting that the
determinants of successful films have changed over time based on the statistically significant increase
in the magnitude of the effect of total awards, the decline in the apparent role of best actor/actress,
and the change of the effect of best film from the 1960s (where it was negative), to the 1970s (where
it became positive).
A more recent detailed study by Nelson et al. (2001) employs a panel data set of weekly box office
figures of 131 top 50 films released between 1978 and 1987 which were nominated for Academy
Award best picture, best actor/actress, best supporting actor/actress, and a control sample of 131
non-nominated films which were released in the same week and were the highest ranked film for a
minimum of 5 weeks. In the first part of their empirical analysis, they model the ‘average revenue per
screen’ and ‘share of total screens’ as a function of film fixed effects, seasonal (quarterly) dummies,
week of release (polynomial) and number of nominations/wins for each of the five categories. They
subsequently model the relationship using a flexible structure to account for timing of release relative
to nomination/win announcements. In the second part of the empirical analysis they employ a survival
model (Weibull with heterogeneity) to analyse how the duration of time which a film spends in the top
50 is affected by nominations/awards. The combined results suggest that a nomination or award for
best picture, or best actor/actress in a leading role has a positive effect on survival, average revenue
per screen and share of screens, but a nomination/award for best actor/actress in a supporting role
has little effect on these variables. They show that, for example, a best picture nomination/award can
increase box office revenues by $4.8m/$12.7m respectively and liken the outcome to a two-stage,
single-elimination tournament where films first compete for a nomination and the survivors compete
for the award. The convexity of the nomination/award payoff is consistent with this sort of tournament.
Deuchert et al. (2005) also examine the effect of Academy Award nominations and awards on
movies’ financial success by considering a sample of 2244 movies (32,040) observations released in
the US market between 1990 and 2000. They examine five definitions of awards: best picture, best
actor/actress in leading role and best actor/actress in supporting role. They employ two models: (1)
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
THE ECONOMICS OF MOVIES 53
examine the effect on weekly revenues assuming the effects do not diminish over time, controlling
for number of weeks already released, opening week revenue, seasonal effects, genre and distributor
effects and (2) allowing time dependence and also differentiating between films which are nominated
but do not win and those which are nominated and do win. Consistent with the approach of Nelson et
al. (2001), they also consider a survival analysis in their study; however, the results of their analysis
differ as they find that while the awards have a positive effect, the main effect is through nominations.
They show that there are three channels of success: (1) winning best actress in a leading role, (2)
winning best picture, (3) winning a best actor in leading role benefit more than when the awards are
announced. An apparent implication of their analysis is that investment in awards is less profitable
once nominations are made than the industry would expect.
Lee (2009) takes an international/cultural perspective on the role of Academy Awards on motion
picture demand. Using nominations and awards as indicators of cinematic achievement he investigates
the relationship between such achievement and a sample of US films’ box office revenues in nine East
Asian countries. In the analysis he makes a distinction between ‘drama’ awards (e.g. best director, best
leading and supporting actor/actress, best screenplay and best film editing) and ‘non-drama’ awards (all
other awards) to investigate how films defined in these respects may have cross-cultural appeal. Using
data on the top 100 US movies from 2002 to 2007, the results show that non-drama awards relate
positively to box office revenues, but drama awards show negative correlations. The interpretation
of such results is that films with culturally specific (American) storylines do not translate for East
Asian audiences as well as films which, for example, might contain relatively more special effects.
Further, he finds that the negative relationship of drama awards and East Asian box office appears more
pronounced in countries less culturally similar to the USA in terms of a culture similarity index.
3.1.4 The Role of Ratings and Genres
Most studies that consider ‘demand’ for motion pictures in an empirical setting typically include control
variables for genre and rating variables. Some studies, however, have considered more closely the role
of these variables in a general setting of demand. De Vany and Walls (2002) investigate the distribution
of revenues, rates-of-return (defined as revenue/budget), and profits (approximated as 0.5 × revenue –
budget) across the same sample of 2015 films considered in De Vany and Walls (1999). In their sample,
more than 50% of all films were R-rated, whereas only 3% were G rated. The descriptive statistics
suggest that stars were more likely to feature in an R-rated film, and particularly in high budget films.
Using the stable Paretian model, they show that there is more probability mass in the (right) tail of the
G, PG and PG13 films relative to R-rated films, and all other ratings stochastically dominate R-rated
films’ rates-of-return up to the 75th percentile – however, this result is primarily driven by a number
of low budget R-rated films in the sample. Their analysis of profit reveals that this distribution is also
asymmetric and that there is more probability mass in the right tail, than the left tail across all ratings.
Further they demonstrate that R-rated films have less probability mass in right tail (i.e. less breakout
films) and (with the exception of PG13) more probability mass in the left tail (i.e. more chance of
losing money). In their concluding comments they suggest that Hollywood may be responding to other
incentives (e.g. artistic/peer acceptance), rather than succumbing to audience demands, or alternatively
that the decision makers involved simply do not understand the odds involved.
Ravid and Basuroy (2004) consider the impact of genres and ratings on film performance. Using
the same data set as Ravid (1999), augmented with opening week (domestic) revenues, advertising
information, positive review proportions, and the number of total reviews, they distinguish R-rated films
as violent, very violent, sexual content and both sexual content and violent. Their mean comparison
results show that violence translates to higher revenues but sex does not. The results show that, although
films with violent or sexual content do not necessarily increase profitability, they lose money less often.
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
54 MCKENZIE
They also provide evidence of sales maximization, rather than profit maximization, which may occur
because of (1) the oligopoly environment (because, among other reasons, studios care about market
shares and revenue figures are highly visible, whereas profit figures are not) and (2) agency concerns
(because executives may not have budgetary control over the input process).
3.2 Production
There are many interesting economic issues that arise from the production of motion pictures. Without
being exhaustive, many of these relate directly to the contractual, financing and integrative arrangements
of the production process. Chisholm (1997) describes in much detail the contractual and institutional
arrangements with respect to the producer, screen-writer, director and actor relationships with the
studio. Primarily, however, her analysis focuses on the producer and actor relations with respect to
fixed or share contracts over revenue and/or profit.11 In the context of the standard principal-agent
model, she argues that share contracts are beneficial, particularly for the actor given that the producer
can be monitored more easily so shirking is easier to detect. She points out, however, that there
are legal costs associated with implementation of a share contract beyond a fixed fee contract. For
example, additional clauses may be required defining exactly what constitutes revenue (e.g. domestic,
international, ancillary etc.), and if it is profit then there needs to be more clauses discussing definitions
of cost (negative cost, interest, distribution expenses). There is also room to exploit incompleteness
in definitions leading to enforcement costs. Her data set is derived from clippings of journals and
periodicals with a total of 118 payment schemes recorded between 1959 and 1989. Of these, 49 were
share payments, and 69 fixed payments. Her results reveal that contract length, actor’s experience and
revenue generating ability all increase probability of a share contract. Prior collaboration and Oscar
recognition (under less statistical significance) are also shown to increase the likelihood of an actor
receiving a share contract.
In subsequent related research, Chisholm (2004) considers the size of the fixed payment portion of
star contracts using the same data set as her previous study covering the years 1959–1989. She explores
various explanations for the size of the fixed payment relating to (1) rent capture, (2) risk sharing, (3)
signalling and (4) portfolio optimization by studios. Her results show that the size of fixed payment
moves with actors history, and that when contracts include fixed and share components, the fixed part
is influenced by risk concerns. She also shows that fixed payment contracts only are influenced by
measures of signalling (marking) and star power, and that both types of contracts support the rent
capture theory that actors are paid rents upfront for the value of the star power they bring. Another
explanation of the fixed part of the contract is that it serves as a risk premium which might move
with the level of film riskiness (e.g. if film genre changes from that of actor’s last film then this may
increase risk).
Corts (2001) considers the integration arrangements of production and distribution and examines two
questions. First, do vertical structures that involve multiple upstream and downstream firms achieve
efficient results, and secondly do divisionalized firms act like fully integrated firms or competing
individual firms. His data set examines the release dates of films in 1995–1996 where 80 production
companies distributed their films through 13 distributors (many of which also have their own production
companies), and partitions weeks of year into windows by two methods: (1) linking troughs in Murphy’s
historic database (reported in Vogel, 2007) creating 10 seasons per year and (2) centring windows
on the peak of cycles creating eight seasons per year. The empirical model investigates how the
distributor/producer relations impact on a pair of films’ release gap in an OLS and (two sided) Tobit
model – because the maximum gap is the number of weeks in the window. The primary right hand side
variables are the corporate ownership arrangements of distributor/producer. His results suggest ‘Same
Producer, Same Distributor’ films are released further apart and even having a common distribution
alone may help to achieve an efficient outcome, but not as successfully as also sharing the same
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
THE ECONOMICS OF MOVIES 55
producer. Also, films sharing just the same producer do not achieve efficient outcomes if they do not
share the same distributor. He also extends the model to investigate at the role of divisionalization (i.e.
different production houses) within the studio and the results show that the divisions act just like the
firm. His evidence suggests that the more complex vertical structures generally do not achieve efficient
outcomes for the structure, and that divisionalized firms generally behave like integrated firms, not like
competitors. He also finds that the release dates for films sharing the same genre are generally further
apart, and that big-budget star laden films are more likely to compete head to head.
Fee (2002) investigates financing decisions of filmmakers in relation to studio versus independent
financing. Using a sample of 349 US films released in 1992–1993 he investigates whether films are
more likely to be independently financed in relation to the filmmaker’s ‘artistic stake’ and ‘effort’. More
broadly, his analysis relates to the theory of incomplete contracts in the sense that there is potential a
trade-off between monetary incentives and managerial benefits in studio versus independent financing.
By using proxies for marketing effort (number of opening screens) and artistic effort (critical review
as reported in Variety), he initially investigates what determines these in relation to genre, budget and
sequels and settles for the genres of ‘action’ and ‘comedy’ as defining films with relatively lower
artistic quality when ‘budget’ is omitted, and just ‘comedy’ when ‘budget’ is included. The results of
his logit and probit models suggest that a film is more likely to be independently financed when the
artistic stake is high and when the film’s genre requires a higher personal exertion of effort.
Goettler and Leslie (2005) investigate the co-financing arrangements of major studios with other
studios, or independent production companies, where co-financing implies an equity stake. Their data
set considers a sample of 1305 titles released between 1987 and 2000 by a major studio. Of these,
361 were co-financed with an independent and 32 were with a major studio. They consider a couple
of potential explanations for co-financing: (1) that it is used to finance relatively riskier films and
(2) that it is used to manage portfolio risk – for example, covariance between titles (genres) and law
of large numbers (would prefer a small stake in many films rather than a large stake in a single
film). Ultimately, however, they provide evidence against both of these and provide two alternative
explanations: (1) co-financing is used to make more big budget films (that may also be tied into theme
parks and other merchandising etc.) and (2) to help in achieving more spaced release dates and less
competition in this aspect.
Palia et al. (2008) also explore co-financing with a data set of 275 films produced by the
12 major distributors. They identify 148 co-financed films and 127 solo-financed films using various
trade publications and interviews with executives, and investigate the following potential explanations:
(1) risk reduction hypothesis, (2) internal capital market hypothesis (when firms have limited capital
with multiple projects will allocate limited capital to the most successful projects), (3) managerial
bargaining hypothesis (e.g. director may earn more when project is carried out through alliances),
(4) market structure hypothesis (i.e. that alliances lead to less competition and an increase in
concentrations), (5) resources pooling hypothesis (which implies larger budgets will be associated
with co-financing), (6) specialization hypothesis (will specialize according to comparative advantage
and hence lead to more profitable outcomes) and (7) lemons hypothesis (that the poorer quality movies
will be co-financed). Their results show that project risk is important to co-financing and that studios
finance their less risky projects internally. They also find that studios which co-finance are more
likely to have higher risk differentials and be financially constrained. Although they are able to find
partial support for resource pooling hypothesis, they are unable to show significant differences between
performance of the two types of films (i.e. co-financed versus non-co-financed) which leads to rejection
of the specialization and lemons hypotheses. They also suggest that firms may form these alliances to
participate in projects in which they would otherwise not be involved with.
Jansen (2005) explores a different dimension of film financing by considering the role of funding
bodies (or more accurately subsidization) in the German film industry. He examines (1) the determinants
of German cinema admissions and rates-of-return, (2) the impact of subsidies as allocated either (i) by
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
56 MCKENZIE
a committee or (ii) by reference to past successes and (3) the profitability of the German industry. He
notes that subsidies account for over half the average budget in German films, and that every film is
subsidized to some extent. He argues because of Germany’s long tradition of cinema as ‘art’ rather than
entertainment, some producers may pursue other objectives than profit, and that committee subsidization
may relax the incentive to increase earnings over expenditures because (the state) pays the difference.
The reference principle, on the other hand, links funding directly to the previous performance of the
production company, and therefore creates stronger incentives for profit maximization and audience
appealing films. The data set he uses covers 120 (of 367) German films released between 1993
and 1998. In his empirical model the dependent variables are admissions and producer’s rates-of￾return, whereas the independent variables include subsidies (committee and reference), star power,
director power, budget, reviews, genre, rating and distributor size. His results suggest that there is a
group of production companies which regularly outperform others (supporting reference subsidies over
committee subsidies), and also that critical reviews impact positively on box office success.
3.3 Distribution
The distribution of motion pictures involves the problem of choosing a release date, deciding on an
opening number of prints (and adjusting these in subsequent weeks), and designing and implementing
an advertising campaign. One of the most important decisions of the film distributor relates to the
timing of a film’s release. Krider and Weinberg (1998) investigate the release date timing game
between two films in a finite season using a two parameter ‘share-attraction’ model – where films
have an initial (fixed) attraction parameter, and a decay parameter. Their theoretical model shows that
three equilibria may emerge: (1) a single equilibrium where both films simultaneously enter (if both
have long legs the loss from delay outweighs the loss from competition), (2) a single equilibrium with
one film opening at the beginning and the other film delaying (if asymmetry exists) and (3) a dual
opening with either movie delaying opening (if films are identical but have short legs and can benefit
from not going head to head). They empirically test their model on 24 major films released during
summer of 1990 by proposing a regression model where the dependent variable is the number of weeks
from beginning of the season at which a film is released, against independent variables including the
opening weekend box office and (half-life) run length. The results showed a significant negative effect
of opening weekend box office, i.e. more successful films are released closer to the beginning of the
season, but no significance of run length – suggesting that legs are ignored, or are hard to anticipate
based on word-of-mouth uncertainty.
In two insightful contributions Einav (2007, 2009) also investigates the relationship between
seasonality and the release timing decisions of distributors. Einav (2007) investigates a sample of
wide-release movies released in the US market between 1985 and 1999 (covering 1956 titles) to
explore the notion of underlying versus observed seasonality. Underlying seasonality may differ from
observed seasonality when distributors release their popular titles on big weekends amplifying the
underlying pattern of demand. He proposes a discrete choice (nested logit) model of demand estimated
with and without movie fixed effects whose coefficients are used to represent ‘quality’. He then infers
amplification effect by examining the magnitude of the standard deviations of the estimated weekly
dummy variable between the two models. His results suggest an amplification effect in the order of
50%, or put another way, underlying seasonality is approximately two thirds of observed seasonality.
He argues that because of fixed ticket prices, market expansion is due to number and quality of movies
released, wherein the bigger markets attract bigger movies, and inflexible ticket prices means that
prices do not adjust to offset increased demand.
In a companion paper Einav (2009) develops a discrete timing game of movie release with
heterogeneous players. He proposes a ‘pseudo backward induction’ method to solve for the perfect
Bayesian equilibrium sequentially which avoids the potential multiplicity of equilibria which is common
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
THE ECONOMICS OF MOVIES 57
in these games. His data set is based on release date change announcements, which are published by
Exhibitor Relations, Inc. as the ‘Features Release Schedule’.12 Release date changes are common in the
motion picture industry which arise both because of internal reasons and in response to competitors’
release announcements. He defines four release windows (5-week periods) and considers the set of
players as exogenously given (i.e. all players are fully observed). Periods observed coincide with major
holiday weekends of Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July and Thanksgiving. Using demand
estimates from Einav (2007), the main empirical finding is that movie distributors over cluster their
release dates, with too many good movies on big weekends, and that the industry could earn more
profits by spreading out release dates.
Moul (2008) focuses on other aspects of the distributor’s problem with respect to weekly (national)
screen allocations and advertising decisions. He uses a PDGEV (principles of differentiation generalized
extreme value), similar to a nested logit, to estimate demand and then apply this to a model in which
distributors choose weekly screen (theatre) allocations and weekly advertising (for which a proxy of
newspaper advertisement size is used). Using the same data set as Moul (2007) – discussed above – but
with the addition of advertising, his results suggest that distributors have found some ways to collude
and limit payments to exhibitors and that advertising is excessive in the industry. Also, the results
suggest that there may be too few cinemas meaning that consumers travel too far to reach cinemas.
3.4 Exhibition
The exhibition industry also offers much scope for economic investigation and, in particular, applying
the techniques of empirical industrial organization to understand its structure, conduct and performance.
In a series of papers, Davis (2005, 2006a, b) considers a number of issues pertaining to the practices,
structure and spatial characteristics of the US motion picture exhibition industry over the years
1993–1997. Using data covering 101 markets in North America, Davis (2005) finds statistically
significant relationships between local market structure (number of screens owned by own and rival
companies within a local market) and the change in admission prices. In his substantiative data set,
which covers 56,729 pricing points from a total of 5743 theatres, he observes that the effect of local
competition is small, and finds no evidence that controlling local ownership (i.e. increasing competition)
will necessarily lead to lower prices. There is even some evidence that common ownership may actually
help to bring down prices which may be plausible given that exhibitors are likely to prefer lower prices
(than distributors), and exploit profit margins in pop-corn sales where they do not share revenues.
In subsequent research, Davis (2006a) again uses a 5-year sample of theatre revenues over the years
1993–1997 to examine (1) incumbent rivals’ revenues (business stealing), (2) own-firm revenues at
existing theatres (cannibalization) and (3) total industry revenues (market expansion) by focusing on
a period where there were a number of entry (mostly high quality multiplexes) and exit decisions
(mostly smaller low quality theatres) in the US exhibition industry. His results provide evidence of
substantial business stealing effects (consistent with industry reports), and also considerable market
expansion effects ($30–$50k per screen). He also shows that business stealing is localized to about 15
miles around a theatre location, but finds little evidence of cannibalization arguing that the process of
entry occurs primarily through theatre chains building new high quality theatres near their rivals, rather
than close to their own theatres, and not by upgrading to protect a location (defensive building).
In a particularly detailed study Davis (2006b) develops a random coefficients discrete choice model
to examine cinema demand using daily admissions of 607 theatres across 36 markets over a seven
day period in June 1996. Along with a number of theatre characteristic variables (such as ticket price,
consumer service, whether or not the theatre had Dolby or DTS technology etc.) and film fixed effect
variables, his demand model also incorporates demographic information from the census to construct
population counts around local cinemas with respect to (concentric circle) distance measures. He finds
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
58 MCKENZIE
that (quadratic) travel costs result in limited substitutability between theatres and local markets. He
argues that the main constraints on the exercise of market power through admission prices involve (1)
consumers substituting to other activities and (2) incentives of distributors (i.e. theatres would prefer
lower admission prices if they could attract the same set of films).
Orbach and Einav (2007) also consider cinema ticket prices in a study of the US market and evaluate
potential economic reasons for the (almost) uniform pricing practices observed in the industry. They
examine two dimensions of the puzzle: (1) the movie puzzle (why different movies are priced the same)
and (2) the show-puzzle (why different times, days and seasons are priced the same). They provide
detail that during the pre-Paramount era (i.e. before 1948) variables pricing strategies were used with
respect to films categorized by quality as A, B, C or D. This continued into the 1950s and 1960s
where event movies were priced above other movies and also there was price variation with respect
to weekday versus weekends, and by type of seat. They examine potential explanations for uniform
pricing based on (1) behavioural explanations, i.e. (i) perceived fairness, (ii) unstable demand when
price might be viewed as a signal of quality and (iii) demand uncertainty, (2) menu and monitoring costs
and (3) structural characteristics of the industry and regulatory constraints, i.e. (i) agency problem (i.e.
the misalignment of distributor and exhibitor incentives such as lower ticket prices due to concession
revenues, and underreporting of revenues) and (ii) double marginalization (which could be internalized
with vertical integration). Their conclusions are that exhibitors could increase profits if they practised
variable pricing, and that the industry could gain, for example, by pricing event movies higher and by
charging different prices for different times.
Chisholm and Norman (2006) consider another important strategic issue relevant to the exhibition
sector of the industry by investigating the dynamic issue of when to replace a film at a specific
location. They use theatre level data of three first-run theatres in the Boston area for a sample covering
between 106 and 121 films at each location released over the period June 2000 to June 2001. Their
empirical survival model considers film-at-theatre survivorship in relation to intra-theatre (rank at
theatre) considerations, factors external to the theatre (national screens, revenues, stars), and inter￾theatre considerations (ownership). The results of their analysis show that theatres within chains avoid
business stealing (cannibalization) by decreasing survival times, and that cinemas owned by different
companies engage in business stealing by increasing the length of a run. Other (control) variables of
their analysis (screens, revenue and stars) show significance but low impact on theatre survival.
Of long-standing interest to economists interested in this industry has been the structure and design
of the exhibition contract, however, very few researchers have actually had access to them for empirical
analysis. The research of Filson et al. (2005) provides an exception.13 These authors develop a
theoretical model to analyse the movie exhibition contract and show that difficulties in forecasting
revenues provide better explanations of the declining share of revenues, rather than explanations based
on asymmetric information. The model also shows that risk aversion by each party and measurement
cost minimization helps explain the typically observed declining share structure. The study employs a
data set of 2769 contracts of 13 cinemas of one of St Louis’ prominent exhibition companies. Under
legal confidence, they describe the nature of the contracts (without being specific) and investigate a
linear sharing rule (as opposed to a sliding scale), and argue that the likely reason this is not adopted
is because it may encourage exhibitors to reduce the length of a run.
Gill (2007) also provides evidence on the exhibition contract by utilizing data on exhibition
contract ‘renegotiation’ (which may occur when a film performed better or worse than expected)
to investigate reasons for vertical integrative relationships between distribution and exhibition. His
data set is particular to the Spanish film industry from 2001 to 2002 and covers 369 films from 21
distributors across 277 theatres. His data set includes the distributor, film nationality, Spanish box
office, US box office and release date of each title. In his study, distributors qualify as integrated
if they owned at least one theatre, resulting in five distributors being classified as integrated. He
takes advantage of the fact that non-integrated theatres play integrated and non-integrated distributors’
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
THE ECONOMICS OF MOVIES 59
films. The results provide evidence that integrated distributors are more likely to distribute movies
with higher renegotiation frequencies, and that they are more likely to use their own theatres for such
movies. Further, he suggests that transaction costs are the likely reason for observing such behaviour.
Collins et al. (2009) examine product differentiation of programming decisions in a study of Italian
cinemas. Their sample consists of a sample of 282 cinemas with 870 screens observed across three
Italian regions (Piemonte, Lazio and Campania) during 2006. They observe that the cinema industry
has been in a state of transition with growth of multiplex cinemas around the major centres and address
the question as to whether or not this has led to more conformity in programming decisions. Creating
an index of ‘conventionality’ which captures the average number of cinemas showing the same titles
as the reference cinema, they investigate the determinants of conventionality as related to population,
age structure of the population, income (GDP) and whether or not the cinema was a multiplex. The
results reveal that higher population leads to higher conventionality in programming (i.e. more cinemas
showing the same film), more young viewers (percentage below and including 14 years) lead to a
higher turnover of films – less conventionality, higher income increases conventionality and multiplex
cinemas also increase conventionality – although not in the model where cinemas (rather than single
screens) are considered which is a manifestation of the construction of the conventionality index in
this respect.
4. Movie Macroeconomics
A number of studies have taken a macroeconomic perspective in considering the film industry. Rather
than focusing on an individual aspect of the industry, such as the demand for a particular film of
given characteristics, the research detailed in this section focuses on the big picture issues pertinent
to the industry. For example, movie macroeconomics might consider aggregate patterns of cinema
demand (and supply) and the impact of various policy, economic and social changes which have
occurred such as the introduction of TV and VCRs, or a change in copyright laws. This section is
sub-divided into discussions of aggregate cinema demand, understanding audiences, trade of motion
pictures and industry structure and finally copyright and piracy. As with the previous section on movie
microeconomics, these classifications serve only as a guide to the subject matter as a number of the
studies reviewed could arguably be grouped into more than one of these categories.
4.1 Aggregate Demand for Cinema
As with the literature on demand for individual films, there is now also a significant collection of
studies which deal broadly with what might be termed aggregate cinema demand, i.e. total market
demand at an aggregated level such as weekly, monthly, quarterly or annually. Often such studies seek
to make use of time series techniques and associated time series variables such as ticket price indexes
and income data. Of particular interest as well have been the structural changes in demand brought
about by such things as the introduction of TV and VCRs. In a series of papers, Cameron (1986,
1988, 1990, 1999) examines the demand and supply of cinema at the aggregate level in the UK. Using
monthly data on cinema admissions, prices, incomes and television licences, Cameron (1986) notes
that the UK cinema industry had been in a state of decline since 1957 which may in part have been due
to higher ticket prices and substitution towards other goods (e.g. TV). He also found strong positive
income elasticity of cinema demand and that relative price elasticities are significantly greater than
one in an absolute sense. This, he argues, is consistent with either profit maximization with shifting
marginal costs or ad hoc price adjustments. Cameron (1988) further suggests that the introduction
of VCRs had a negative impact on cinema admissions. However, due to data availability only at the
annual level for VCR sales, he refrains from attempting to quantify the size of the impact.
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
60 MCKENZIE
Cameron (1990) revisits the issue of income elasticity using pooled cross section data. Comparing
his estimates of income elasticity with a range of other research on leisure and cultural activities
(sport, orchestra, Broadway theatre etc.) he notes his results are at the top of this range, being close to
other performing arts, suggesting cinema falling into the same category as more obviously art related or
cultural goods. Using the same data set, Cameron (1999) investigates Becker’s rational addiction model,
which has previously been applied to consumption goods such as cigarettes, alcohol and gambling. His
results, however, fail to provide any strong support for the rational addiction model describing cinema
demand.
Hand (2002) uses an ARIMA (autoregressive integrated moving average) model to investigate a data
set of annual British cinema admissions from 1936 to 1999. The ARIMA specifications employed are
(1, 1, 1), (2, 1, 0) and (0, 1, 2) – where (a, b, c) denotes the order of (a) autoregression, (b) integration,
(c) moving average. He truncates the last 3 years of his sample to provide forecasting checks of his
models with the actual data and finds that the (1, 1, 1) model is capable of providing only short range
(i.e. 1 year) forecasts. He suggests the results are symptomatic of a combined market expansion effect
and product substitution effect when a good film is released which captures positive word-of-mouth.
In another study using British time series data, MacMillan and Smith (2001) investigate cinema
demand and supply in response to competition from TV using annual data from 1950 to 1987. These
authors use VAR (vector autoregressive) time series techniques to investigate the effects of ticket
prices, TV ownership, the number of cinema sites, income per capita and (age) demographics on
cinema demand during this period. Their results show that negative shocks to demand throughout over
the sample period reduced the supply of screens, consequently having a feedback effects on admissions.
They also observe, however, that introduction of multiplex cinemas in the 1990s interrupted and partially
reversed this downward spiral.
Dewenter and Westermann (2005) consider the demand for cinema in Germany using annual data
over the period 1950–2002. They note that attendances of cinema peaked in the 1950s but fell drastically
thereafter with the introduction of TV among other things. Using a single equation framework, they find
that cinema demand is elastic to price (−2.25) and income (4.48) – suggesting that it is a luxury good
– and note that the market share of commercial television channels is negatively related to demand for
cinema. They also model simultaneously demand and supply using two-stage least squares (2SLS) and
seemingly unrelated regression techniques and find that (absolute) own price elasticity of demand is in
the range 2.40–2.76, prices of other (substitute) cultural goods have positive and significant coefficients,
but income elasticity is lower than the single equation model and sometimes insignificant. With respect
to the supply side of the model, they observe that lagged attendances and population growth increased
supply, but that the introduction of TV and VCRs had a negative impact on supply.
Fernandez-Blanco and Banos-Pino (1997) examine cinema demand in Spain using a cointegration
analysis on annual data set spanning 1968–1992. They examine the effects of changing theatre ticket
prices (combined with travel prices), income and TV as the primary explanatory variables of annual
admissions. To model the impact of TVs they create a dummy variable which takes the value one
after 1984 – the year state television ceased to be monopolized in Spain. They find that cinema is a
luxury good and that its demand is elastic with respect to price. They also find that that the increase
in television programming in the 1980s was responsible for a maximum of 9% reduction in cinema
attendance.
A recent study of Bi and Giles (2009) using weekly US weekend box office totals has employed
extreme value theory to model industry returns over the period 1982–2006. They use the peak over
threshold method to fit industry returns to the upper and lower tail of the generalized Pareto distribution,
and then investigate two typical measures of risk using the value at risk and expected shortfall techniques
on the implied distribution. The results suggest the returns are appropriately modelled using the
generalized Pareto distribution and that for a given investment in the industry, the probability of loss
is relatively lower than the probability of gain.
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
THE ECONOMICS OF MOVIES 61
4.2 Understanding Audiences
Cuadrado and Frasquet (1999) examine the growth of multiplexes and the effects on cinema demand in
the Spanish industry. Using survey analysis of 505 cinemagoers aged between 14 and 35, they examine
the segmentation of the cinema audiences based on demographic and socio-economic variables to gain
insights into the profile of young cinema audiences. They find three differentiated groups of cinema
attendees – the social, the apathetic and the cinema buff – and that different types of cinemas have
different appeal to different groups – shopping centre multiplexes having wide appeal and multiplexes
specializing in non-Spanish films having appeal to cinema buffs.
Collins and Hand (2005) also consider a survey approach in their analysis of aggregate patterns of
cinema attendance. They examine the cross-sectional probability that individuals will go to a movie (in
the last two months) using individual level data reported in the Cinema and Video Industry Audience
Research survey.14 They consider the socio-economic group of the respondent (as proxy for income
measured on a six-point scale), age of respondent, residential identification variables (six-point scale),
and the potential substitutes of television and video/DVD of explanatory variables. Although they do
not observe price they contend that variation in ticket prices may affect time/day, or theatre, but not
choice of whether to go or not to see a movie due to its constancy within the time frame considered.
Their results show that (1) the probability of cinema attendance increases with income (socio-economic
group), (2) one of the residential classification dummies is significant (affluent urbanites), (3) gender
(male) is significant, (4) interaction of gender with age shows no significance (i.e. older men are less
likely to go to the movies than younger men, or women their own age) and (5) video rentals and TV
viewing have negative relations, but stress this as tentative due to potential endogeneity. To further
check the robustness of their results, they also consider whether the model can explain who never goes
to the movies. All of previously significant variables were still significant, suggesting the sample of
films over the two month sample time did not appear to be biasing results in any systematic fashion.
Yamamura (2008) explores the recent revival of the Japanese cinema industry using aggregated
attendance data from 47 prefectures over the period 1990–2001. He investigates annual attendance in
relation to covariates relating to ticket prices, the proportion of Japanese titles shown, the characteristics
of cinemas (screens, multiplex features, parking etc.), the availability of substitute products (satellite
TV, cable TV), as well as information on the population demographics of the prefecture (density,
age, immigration status etc.) and the nature of social networks (proxied by population turnover and
immigration between prefectures). The results of his 2SLS panel analysis reveal that demand is price
elastic, multiplexes increase cinema demand, parking availability increases attendance, domestic films
decrease attendance, income impacts negatively (against intuition) on attendance, satellite and cable
TV are substitutes for cinema, cinema attendance rates are higher for younger (20–24) and older
people (60+) than other adults, and that the decay of social networks decreases attendance. In a further
conditional logit analysis of the location choices of newly built multiplex cinemas using a similar set
of covariates to the analysis of attendance, the results suggest that high levels of attendance discourage
new infrastructure, higher ticket prices increases new multiplex construction, and that new multiplexes
are less likely to be built where there are existing multiplex cinemas. As well he provides evidence
that multiplex construction is less likely to take place in prefectures with a higher number of satellite
and cable TV providers, and that the decay of social networks reduces the likelihood of new multiplex
construction.
4.3 Trade of Motion Pictures and Industry Structure
Marvasti (1994) examines international trade behaviour of motion pictures as ‘cultural goods’ and the
effect of trade barriers on net exports of films. Using cross-sectional 1985 data across a number
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
62 MCKENZIE
of countries he models (film) trade as a function of a range of variables including population,
capital–labour ratio, language, religion, GNP, quantitative restrictions, subsidies and (the lack of)
intellectual property rights. He finds evidence that trade barriers do lead to higher net exports and the
direction of trade in films is from rich to poor countries. He also estimates a Cobb–Douglas production
function for film which shows that there are (close to) constant returns to scale in the industry. In
following research, Marvasti (2000) again examines motion picture trade in relation to tariffs, market
shares, domestic market size, taste similarities, VCRs, stars and domestically popular films among other
variables. Using data from 1961 to 1988, his results indicate that (1) stars and domestic blockbusters
do not influence consumption of films overseas, (2) tariffs are effective trade barriers and (3) VCRs
increase the chance of piracy.
Canterbery and Marvasti (2001) show increased industry revenues are achieved when increasing
star costs are incurred and that the studios rely on stars to differentiate their product. Using US data
spanning the years 1965–1991 they test a number of hypotheses using time series techniques. In their
analysis they examine the following: (1) hyper-differentiation of movies results in low price elasticity
of demand for admissions, (2) the main successful source of product differentiation is the movie star,
who provides information regarding the quality of the product to the consumer, (3) the presence of
supra-specific human capital (stars) adds greatly to the quality, demand and revenue without a strong
positive effect on quantitative film output, (4) the use of generic human capital or ‘cast members’
adds greatly to the quantitative film output while affecting demand or revenue little, (5) circulating
capital affects positively quantitative and qualitative film output, (6) the movie experience is an inferior
good and (7) economies of scale exist in the production of movies. In their analysis, they define a
‘blockbuster’ as a movie grossing at least $10 million in real terms (1982–1984 dollars) and define
a ‘star’ as an index based on the results of a randomly distributed survey. Their results suggest that
they can support most of their hypotheses and note that external as well as internal economies of
scale, imperfect competition and vertical integration have been critical to the success of the US movie
industry.
In a further study of motion picture trade, vis-`a-vis cultural and other barriers, Marvasti and
Canterbery (2005) use a gravity iceberg model to explore the apparent paradox of the US motion
picture industry’s proliferation despite various obstacles relating to protectionism, rising costs and
relatively stable ticket prices. Using annual pooled cross-section data of 33 countries over the period
1991–1995, the authors observe that trade barriers are: mostly non-traditional in nature with some of
the biggest ones relating to denial of property rights – i.e. movie piracy. As a first stage, they employ a
Poisson model to explain a numerical index of the number of trade barriers and an ordered probit model
to explain a qualitative index of the complexity of trade barriers. Included in their explanatory variables
are the ratio of motion picture investment to GDP, number of films produced, whether or not country
is adjacent to the USA, adult literacy rate, percentage of English speaking population, and percentage
of Judeo-Christian population. In the second stage, they use the predicted values of trade barriers in
an instrumental variable fimework to estimate the US export Function far motion pictures. In addition
to the instrumental variables, they include the gravity measure (spatial distance and income difference)
and other cultural barrier variables related to adjacent country or not English speaking percentage,
literacy rat, Christian religion rate, and whether or not the country classifies as less developed They
show that protectionism abroad tends to increase with US exports implying that particular countries
desire to develop their local industries. They also argue that the Canadian and Mexican industries have
used protectionist strategies due to their proximity to the USA.
Scott (2004) examines the structure of the US distribution market over the period 1980–2000,
focusing on the role of independents, majors and subsidiaries of majors. His descriptive statistics suggest
that although independents supplied over half the market during his sample period they controlled only
about 10% of the revenue. He argues that the industry is segmented into three overlapping tiers and
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
THE ECONOMICS OF MOVIES 63
proposes a simple regression model that focuses attention on number of titles released by the different
types of distributors in a particular year as a function of money spent on films in the previous year and
the prevailing interest rate. His results suggest that independent distributors are particularly sensitive
to the former variable, for which he explains as riding on success of majors, and the majors are
highly and inversely sensitive to interest rates, potentially owing to the larger production costs incurred
and subsequent reduction in titles produced. He also notes that international export markets have
expanded greatly in recent years, partly as a result of strategic trade initiatives underwritten by the US
government.
4.4 Copyright Law and Piracy
Using data from 38 countries during the years 1990–2000, Hui and Png (2002) investigate the impact
of economic incentives on the international supply of big screen movies and, in particular, the impact
of a 1998 change to copyright law in the USA. Using data on variables including TV and video
ownership, personal disposable income and population, they develop a model of national movie supply
and demand and examine two main questions: (1) how changing economic incentives (defined in
the context of VCR ownership and higher levels of disposable income) affect equilibrium conditions
and (2) how the impact of a change in US copyright law (relating to re-authorship copyright period)
affects the industry. The results suggest strongly that the supply of creative work did respond to
economic incentives; however, they are unable to provide any evidence of tighter copyright laws
increasing movie production. They also note that the effect of TV ownership was significantly
negative on the equilibrium supply of movies, suggesting that the substitution between television
and theatre attendance outweighed the increased supply of movies through television and population
growth.
Perhaps one of the biggest concerns to the industry in the present day is the potential for lost revenue
from piracy. Although piracy may take a variety of forms, the main concern for studios and distributors
is arguably the illegal sale of mass produced pirated copies, and the proliferation of downloading
such files on the internet. Using confidential studio data from an actual leaked title, De Vany and
Walls (2007) examine the impact on a film’s potential lost revenue in relation to the number of illegal
download sites which had it available for download prior to and during its theatrical run. Their simple
regression framework examines the weekly change in distributor reported revenue as a function of
time (i.e. week of run) and the number of download sites featuring the title. Although they observe a
particularly small sample, they estimate the loss from piracy to be between US$242 and US$621 per
active illegal download site and using a median quantile regression, with a time quadratic variable, as
their preferred model estimate this at US$437 per site. Overall their estimates suggest that the loss
associated with a contemporaneous pirate internet release is on the order of US$40m for a typical
studio movie.
In another study concerned with piracy in the film industry, Walls (2008a, b) considers a cross￾country analysis of 26 countries’ piracy rates as reported in 2004 in relation to a number of socio￾economic variables. Specifically, he considers an index of collectivism, cost to enforce property rights
as a percentage of GNI, per capita GDP, and the number of internet users per 1000 people. The
results of both a linear and logistic specification reveal that piracy is increasing in collectivism and
decreasing in income, but once property right enforcement and the level of internet usage are included
as explanatory variables, income ceases to be a determinant of the piracy rate. He also investigates
how individual countries may impact on findings by examining the differences between estimated
coefficients with and without the specific country included. This analysis revealed that Ecuador, Korea,
Pakistan and Switzerland all have significant impacts on the estimated coefficients – yet the question
of ‘why’ is left to future research endeavours.
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
64 MCKENZIE
5. Concluding Comments and Directions for New Research
The motion picture industry certainly offers economists many interesting puzzles – particularly for
applied researchers. Although the industry may be small in comparison to other consumer industries, it
is by far the largest ‘cultural’ or ‘entertainment’ industry. This paper has attempted to unify much of the
existing research which has been written primarily by (applied) economists over the last two decades.
Also, an attempt has been made to structure this discussion in a coherent way such that the body of
literature which is increasingly becoming known as ‘movie-economics’ can be further sub-divided as
either micro or macro, and then further grouped again with other similar research.
The history of the industry is particularly interesting, and the practices of pre-Paramount era
have begun re-emerging across various countries. It seems true that vertical integration between
production/distribution and exhibition (or part thereof) is a useful way in which to deal with the
nature of the industry and, in particular, the extreme uncertainty faced. There is still much scope
for new research in this area, with respect to integration formation, anti-trust issues, and the way in
which films are licensed to exhibitors. In particular, what are the advantages of horizontal/vertical
integrative relationships for firms, consumers and overall welfare? Do such alliances foster greater
product diversity? Which parties are harmed by such practices? Etc.
It has become well understood that motion pictures are an inherently uncertain product. Given the
industry’s obsession with reporting national sales figures, and the range of film specific variables which
are either directly or subjectively quantifiable, it will remain an endeavour of economists to attempt
to explain causal factors of films’ performance with respect to variables such as production budgets,
advertising, screens, stars, reviews, awards, genres, ratings etc. There is also a growing realization,
however, that there exist complications in models of this sort with respect to non-normal revenue
distributions, and potentially endogenous right hand side variables. Future studies should seek remedial
measures for these problems so that meaningful inference can be made in such models. In particular, the
way in which studio/distributor expectations (and responsive strategic decisions) interact with consumer
expectations and word-of-mouth will continue to provide an interesting area for research activity.
The various stages of production, distribution and exhibition also offer many opportunities for new
research. Research related to elements of the production process will inherently involve an examination
of contractual relationships (whether this be between artist and studio, or producer and studio etc.),
and the manner in which financing arrangements are made. Research related to the distribution stage
of the project has a large cross over with the work of marketing scholars, given the primary functions
of the distributor relate to the strategic decisions of choosing an optimal release date and pattern,
and also designing and implementing an advertising campaign. Empirical game theory techniques are
likely to provide important insights to this dimension of the process. Finally, the exhibition stage and
industry offers researchers and opportunity to examine short-run, medium-run and long-run problems
as they relate to the day-to-day operations of film programming, the local competitive environment and
entry/exit decisions of theatre owners. Empirical industrial organization researchers, using discrete￾choice/differentiated-product models can usefully apply their tools here and with increased cinema
level data availability this is likely to provide an especially fruitful area of research.
Finally, with respect to movie macroeconomics, studying aggregate patterns of cinema attendance
will continue to provide useful insights as general structural changes occur both within and outside
of the industry. In particular, given that the industry is moving to a new age of digital distribution
and projection, these changes are likely to have an impact on viewers’ habits. Also, given the falling
prices of substitute technologies (including Plasma and LCD TVs and Blu-Ray), it is also likely that
these will impact on aggregate patterns of attendance should the industry not respond accordingly.
Another important and to-date under researched issue confronting the industry is that of piracy. Given
the proliferation of the internet and the increasing speed of bandwidth, the piracy problem is likely to
become particularly important to the film industry over the next few years.
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
THE ECONOMICS OF MOVIES 65
Acknowledgements
This paper is based on a lecture prepared for the European Science Days Summer School on ‘The Economics
of Art and Culture’ in Steyr, Austria, July 2009. I am grateful for the useful comments of two anonymous
referees on an earlier version of the paper. The usual disclaimer applies.
Notes
1. There is something of a grey area between much of the marketing and economic literature on motion
pictures. This study discusses in detail only a small number of the (many) marketing papers which
exist. The interested reader should consult studies such as Eliashberg and Sahwney (1994), Sawhney
and Eliashberg (1996), Neelamegham and Chintagunta (1999), Swami et al. (1999), Eliashberg et al.
(2000), Edwards and Buckmire (2001), Swami et al. (2001), Ainslie et al. (2005), Krider et al. (2005),
Elberse and Anand (2006), Hennig-Thurau et al. (2007a, b), Joshi and Hanssens (2009) etc. to become
familiar with the research efforts of this discipline.
2. In saying these surveys only cover a limited number of studies on the industry is not to suggest that
they are inferior as often the objective may be to focus on a particular topic which may extend beyond
research focused solely on the industry itself. For example, De Vany (2006) and Walls (2008a, b)
both cite much research on heavy tailed distributions which relates specifically to the models of movie
demand which they have jointly developed over a number of years (see below) and each discuss in their
respective survey.
3. Along with economists, researchers from other disciplines have also become increasingly interested in
the motion picture industry over recent years – among others these disciplines include (most obviously)
film studies, media and communications, management, sociology, psychology, mathematics and physics.
4. This section borrows from Litman (1998) and Vogel (2007).
5. See also Storper (1989) and Aksoy and Robins (1992).
6. Sedgwick and Pokorny (1998, 2005).
7. All of these papers and more are collated in De Vany (2004). Also, De Vany surmises much of this work
in his chapter entitled ‘The Movies’ in the Handbook of the Economics of Art and Culture (Ginsburgh
and Throsby, eds, 2006).
8. Walls (1997) and Hand (2001) also find increasing returns to information using Hong Kong and UK
data sets, respectively.
9. De Vany (2004, Chapter 11) and McKenzie (2010) have used the related Pareto distribution to explain
the careers of directors/actors and movie producers, respectively.
10. Wall Street Journal (2001) cited in Basuroy et al. (2003).
11. See also Weinstein (1998).
12. Einav and Ravid (2009) use release date changes in conjunction with stock market prices of the publicly
traded studios of the films they represent to show that the market responds negatively to any news of a
date change.
13. Blumenthal (1988), discussed above, and Gill (2007), discussed below, provide other exceptions.
14. Eliashberg et al. (2006, footnote 1) refer a related type of research using survey analysis as the
‘psychological approach’ and cite a number of papers in this respect. Whereas theses studies typically
investigate opinions, needs, moods, etc. in their survey design, Collins and Hand (2005) concentrate on
economic variables in their approach.
References
Ainslie, A., Dreze, X. and Zurfryden, F. (2005) Modeling movie life cycles and market share. Marketing
Science 24(3): 508–517.
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
66 MCKENZIE
Aksoy, A. and Robins, K. (1992) Hollywood for the 21st century: global competition for critical mass in
image markets. Cambridge Journal of Economics 16: 1–22.
Albert, S. (1998) Movie stars and the distribution of financially successful films in the motion picture
industry. Journal of Cultural Economics 22(4): 249–270.
Bagella, M. and Becchetti, L. (1999) The determinants of motion picture box office performance: evidence
from motion pictures produced in Italy. Journal of Cultural Economics 23: 237–256.
Basuroy, S., Chatterjee, S. and Ravid, S.A. (2003) How critical are critical reviews? The box office effects
of film critics, star power, and budgets. Journal of Marketing 67: 103–117.
Bi, G. and Giles, D. (2009) Modelling the financial risk associated with U.S. movie box office earnings.
Mathematics and Computers in Simulation 79: 2759–2766.
Blumenthal, M. (1988) Auctions with constrained information: blind bidding for motion pictures. Review of
Economics and Statistics 70: 191–198.
Cameron, S. (1986) The supply and demand for cinema tickets: some U.K. evidence. Journal of Cultural
Economics 10(1): 38–62.
Cameron, S. (1988) The impact of video recorders on cinema attendance. Journal of Cultural Economics
12(1): 73–80.
Cameron, S. (1990) The demand for cinema in the United Kingdom. Journal of Cultural Economics 14(1):
35–47.
Cameron, S. (1999) Rational addiction and the demand for cinema. Applied Economic Letters 6: 617–620.
Canterbery, E. and Marvasti, A. (2001) The U.S. motion picture industry: an empirical approach. Review of
Industrial Organisation 19: 81–98.
Caves, R. (2000) Creative Industries. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Chisholm, D. (1997) Profit-sharing versus fixed-payment contracts: evidence from the motion pictures
industry. Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 13(1): 169–201.
Chisholm, D. (2003) Motion pictures. In R. Towse (ed.), A Handbook of Cultural Economics. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar.
Chisholm, D. (2004) Two-part share contracts, risk, and the life cycle of stars: some empirical results from
motion-pictures contracts. Journal of Cultural Economics 28(1): 37–56.
Chisholm, D. and Norman, G. (2006) When to exit a product: evidence from the US motion picture industry.
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 96(2): 57–61.
Collins, A. and Hand, C. (2005) Analyzing moviegoing demand: an individual-level cross-sectional approach.
Managerial and Decision Economics 26: 319–330.
Collins, A., Hand, C. and Snell, M. (2002) What makes a blockbuster? Economic analysis of film success
in the U.K. Managerial and Decision Economics 23(6): 343–354.
Collins, A., Scorcu, A. and Zanloa, R. (2009) Distribution conventionality in the movie sector: an economic
analysis of cinema supply. Managerial and Decision Economics 30: 517–527.
Corts, K. (2001) The strategic effects of vertical market structure: common agency and divisionalization in
the U.S. motion picture industry. Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 10(4): 509–528.
Cuadrado, M. and Frasquet, M. (1999) Segmentation of cinema audiences: an explanatory study applied to
young consumers. Journal of Cultural Economics 23: 257–267.
Davis, P. (2005) The effect of local competition on retail prices in the US motion picture exhibition market.
Journal of Law and Economics 48(2): 677–708.
Davis, P. (2006a) Measuring the business stealing, cannibalization and market expansion effects of entry in
the motion picture exhibition market. Journal of Industrial Economics 54(3): 293–321.
Davis, P. (2006b) Spatial competition in retail markets: movie theatres. Rand Journal of Economics 37(4):
964–981.
Deuchert, E., Adjamah, K. and Pauly, F. (2005) For Oscar glory or Oscar Money? Journal of Cultural
Economics 29(3): 159–176.
De Vany, A. (2004) Hollywood Economics: How Extreme Uncertainty Shapes the Film Industry. London:
Routledge.
De Vany, A. (2006) The movies. In V. Ginsburgh and D. Throsby (eds), Handbook of the Economics of Art
and Culture. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
De Vany, A. and Eckert, R. (1991) Motion picture antitrust: the Paramount cases revisited. Research in Law
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
THE ECONOMICS OF MOVIES 67
and Economics 14: 51–112. Also published in De Vany, A. (ed.) (2004) Hollywood Economics: How
Extreme Uncertainty Shapes the Film Industry. London: Routledge.
De Vany, A. and Walls, D. (1996) Bose–Einstein dynamics and adaptive contracting in the motion picture
industry. The Economic Journal 106: 1493–1514. Also published in De Vany, A. (ed.) (2004) Hollywood
Economics: How Extreme Uncertainty Shapes the Film Industry. London: Routledge.
De Vany, A. and Walls, D. (1997) The market for motion pictures: rank, revenue and survival. Economic
Inquiry 35(4): 783–797. Also published in De Vany, A. (ed.) (2004) Hollywood Economics: How Extreme
Uncertainty Shapes the Film Industry. London: Routledge.
De Vany, A. and Walls, D. (1999) Uncertainty in the movie industry: does star power reduce the terror of
the box office? Journal of Cultural Economics 23: 285–318. Also published in De Vany, A. (ed.) (2004)
Hollywood Economics: How Extreme Uncertainty Shapes the Film Industry. London: Routledge.
De Vany, A. and Walls, D. (2002) Does Hollywood make too many R-rated movies? Risk, stochastic
dominance, and the illusion of expectation. Journal of Business 75(3): 425–451. Also published in
De Vany, A. (ed.) (2004) Hollywood Economics: How Extreme Uncertainty Shapes the Film Industry.
London: Routledge.
De Vany, A. and Walls, D. (2004) Motion picture profit, the stable Paretian hypothesis and the curse of the
superstar. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 28(6): 1035–1057. Also published in De Vany,
A. (ed.) (2004) Hollywood Economics: How Extreme Uncertainty Shapes the Film Industry. London:
Routledge.
De Vany, A. and Walls, D. (2007) Estimating the effects of movie piracy on box-office revenue. Review of
Industrial Organization 30(4): 291–301.
Dewenter, R. and Westermann, M. (2005) Cinema demand in Germany. Journal of Cultural Economics 29:
213–231.
Edwards, D.A. and Buckmire, R. (2001) A differential equation model of North American cinematic box
office dynamics. Journal of Management Mathematics 12: 41–74.
Einav, L. (2007) Seasonality in the U.S. motion picture industry. Rand Journal of Economics 38(1): 127–145.
Einav, L. (2009) Not all rivals look alike: estimating an equilibrium model of the release date timing game.
Economic Inquiry, to be published. DOI: 10.1111/j.1465-7295.2009.00239.x
Einav, L. and Ravid, A. (2009) Stock market response to changes in movies’ opening dates. Journal of
Cultural Economics 33(4): 311–319.
Elberse, A. (2007) The power of stars: do star actors drive the success of movies? Journal of Marketing 71:
102–120.
Elberse, A. and Anand, B. (2006) Advertising and expectations: the effectiveness of pre-release advertising
for motion pictures: an empirical investigation using a simulated market. Information Economics and
Policy 19: 319–343.
Elberse, A. and Eliashberg, J. (2003) Demand and supply dynamics for sequentially released products in
international markets: the case of motion pictures. Marketing Science 22(3): 329–354.
Eliashberg, J. and Sahwney, M. (1994) Modelling goes to Hollywood: predicting individual differences in
movie enjoyment. Management Science 40(9): 1151–1174.
Eliashberg, J. and Shugan, S. (1997) Film critics: influencers or predictors? Journal of Marketing 61(2):
68–78.
Eliashberg, J., Jonker, J., Sahwney, M. and Wierenga, B. (2000) MOVIEMOD: an implementable decision
support system for pre-release market evaluation of motion pictures. Marketing Science 19(3): 226–243.
Eliashberg, J., Elberse, A. and Leenders, M. (2006) The motion picture industry: critical issues in practice,
current research, and new research directions. Marketing Science 25(6): 638–661.
Fee, E. (2002) The costs of outside equity control: evidence from motion picture financing decisions. Journal
of Business 75(4): 681–711.
Fernandez-Blanco, V. and Banos-Pino, J. (1997) Cinema demand in Spain: a cointegration analysis. Journal
of Cultural Economics 21: 57–75.
Filson, D., Switzer, D. and Besocke, P. (2005) At the movies: the economics of exhibition contracts. Economic
Inquiry 43(2): 354–369.
Gemser, G., Van Oostrum, M. and Leenders, M. (2007) The impact of film reviews on the box office
performance of art house versus mainstream motion pictures. Journal of Cultural Economics 31: 43–63.
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
68 MCKENZIE
Gill, R. (2007) ‘Make-or-buy’ in movies: integration and ex post renegotiation. International Journal of
Industrial Organisation 25: 643–655.
Ginsburgh, V. (2003) Awards, success and aesthetic quality in the arts. Journal of Economic Perspectives
17(2): 99–111.
Ginsburgh, V. and Weyers, S. (1999) On the perceived quality of movies. Journal of Cultural Economics 23:
269–283.
Goettler, R. and Leslie, P. (2005) Co-financing to manage risk in the motion picture industry. Journal of
Economics and Management Strategy 14(2): 231–261.
Hand, C. (2001) Increasing returns to information: further evidence from the UK film market. Applied
Economics Letters 8: 419–421.
Hand, C. (2002) The distribution and predictability of cinema admissions. Journal of Cultural Economics
26: 53–64.
Hanssen, F.A. (2000) The block-booking of films re-examined. Journal of Law and Economics 43: 395–426.
Hennig-Thurau, T., Henning, V. and Sattler, H. (2007a) Consumer file sharing of motion pictures. Journal
of Marketing 71: 1–18.
Hennig-Thurau, T., Henning, V., Sattler, H., Eggers, F. and Houston, M. (2007b) The last picture show?
Timing and order of movie distribution channels. Journal of Marketing 71: 63–83.
Holbrook, M. (1999) Popular appeal versus expert judgements of motion pictures. Journal of Consumer
Research 26: 144–155.
Hui, K. and Png, I. (2002) On the supply of creative work: evidence from the movies. American Economic
Review 92(2): 217–220.
Jansen, C. (2005) The performance of German motion pictures, profits and subsidies: some empirical
evidence. Journal of Cultural Economics 29(3): 191–212.
Joshi, A. and Hanssens, D. (2009) Movie advertising and the stock market valuation of studios: a case of
‘great expectations’? Marketing Science 28(2): 239–250.
Kenney, R. and Klein, B. (1983) The economics of block-booking. Journal of Law and Economics 26(3):
497–540.
Kenney, R. and Klein, B. (2000) How block-booking facilitated self-enforcing contracts. Journal of Law and
Economics 43: 427–435.
Krider, R. and Weinberg, C. (1998) Competitive dynamics and the introduction of new products: the motion
picture timing game. Journal of Marketing Research 35: 1–15.
Krider, R., Li, T., Liu, Y. and Weinberg, C. (2005) The lead lag puzzle of demand and distribution: a
graphical method applied to movies. Marketing Science 24(4): 635–645.
Lee, F. (2009) Cultural discount of cinematic achievement: the academy awards and U.S. movies’ East Asian
box office. Journal of Cultural Economics 33(4): 239–263.
Litman, B. (1998) The Motion Picture Mega-Industry. Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
MacMillan, P. and Smith, I. (2001) Explaining post-war cinema attendance in Great Britain. Journal of
Cultural Economics 25: 91–108.
Marvasti, A. (1994) International trade in cultural goods: a cross sectional analysis. Journal of Cultural
Economics 18: 135–148.
Marvasti, A. (2000) Motion pictures industry: economies of scale and trade. International Journal of the
Economics of Business 7(1): 99–114.
Marvasti, A. and Canterbery, R. (2005) Cultural and other barriers to motion picture trade. Economics Inquiry
43(1): 39–54.
McKenzie, J. (2008) Bayesian information transmission and stable distributions: motion picture revenues at
the Australian box office. Economic Record 84(266): 338–353.
McKenzie, J. (2009) Revealed word of mouth and adaptive supply: survival of motion pictures at the
Australian box office. Journal of Cultural Economics 33(4): 279–299.
McKenzie, J. (2010) Movie producers and the statistical distribution of achievement. Applied Economics
Letters, to be published. DOI: 10.1080/13504850903194183
Moul, C. (ed.) (2005) A Concise Handbook of Movie Industry Economics. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Moul, C. (2007) Measuring word-of-mouth’s impact on theatrical movie admissions. Journal of Economics
and Management Strategy 16(4): 859–892.
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
THE ECONOMICS OF MOVIES 69
Moul, C. (2008) Retailer entry conditions and wholesaler conduct: the theatrical distribution of motion
pictures. International Journal of Industrial Organisation 26: 966–983.
Neelamegham, R. and Chintagunta, P. (1999) A Bayesian model to forecast new product performance in
domestic and international markets. Marketing Science 18: 115–136.
Nelson, R., Donihue, M., Waldman, D. and Wheaton, C. (2001) What’s an Oscar worth? Economic Inquiry
39(1): 1–16.
Orbach, B. and Einav, L. (2007) Uniform prices for differentiated goods: the case of the movie-theater
industry. International Review of Law and Economics 27(2): 129–153.
Palia, D., Ravid, S.A. and Reisel, N. (2008) Choosing to co-finance: analysis of project-specific alliances in
the movie industry. Review of Financial Studies 21(2): 483–511.
Pokorny, M. and Sedgwick, J. (2010) Profitability trends in Hollywood: 1929 to 1999: somebody must know
something. Economic History Review 63(1): 56–84.
Prag, J. and Casavant, J. (1994) An empirical study of the determinants of revenue and marketing expenditures
in the motion picture industry. Journal of Cultural Economics 18(3): 217–235.
Ravid, S.A. (1999) Information, blockbusters and stars: a study of the film industry. Journal of Business
72(4): 463–492.
Ravid, S.A. and Basuroy, S. (2004) Managerial objectives, the R-rating puzzle, and the production of violent
films. Journal of Business 77(2): S155–S192.
Ravid, S.A., Wald, J. and Basuroy, S. (2006) Distributors and film critics: does it take two to tango? Journal
of Cultural Economics 30: 201–218.
Reinstein, D. and Snyder, C. (2005) The influence of expert reviews on consumer demand for experience
goods: a case study of movie critics. Journal of Industrial Economics 103(1): 27–51.
Sawhney, M. and Eliashberg, J. (1996) A parsimonious model for forecasting gross box office revenues of
motion pictures. Marketing Science 15(2): 113–131.
Scott, A. (2004) Hollywood and the world: the geography of motion picture distribution and marketing.
Review of International Political Economy 11(1): 33–61.
Sedgwick, J. and Pokorny, M. (1998) The risk environment of film making: Warner Bros in the inter war
years. Explorations in Economic History 35: 196–220.
Sedgwick, J. and Pokorny, M. (2005) The film business in the United States and Britain during the 1930s.
Economic History Review 58: 79–112.
Smith, S. and Smith, K. (1986) Successful movies: a preliminary empirical analysis. Applied Economics
18(5): 501–507.
Squire, J. (ed.) (2003) The Movie Business Book, 3rd edn. New York: Fireside.
Storper, M. (1989) The transition to flexible specialisation in the US film industry: external economies, the
division of labour, and the crossing of industrial divides. Cambridge Journal of Econoimcs 13: 273–305.
Swami, S., Eliashberg, J. and Weinberg, C. (1999) SilverScreener: a modelling approach to movie screens
management. Marketing Science 18(3): 352–372.
Swami, S., Puterman, M. and Weinberg, C. (2001) Play it again, Sam? Optimal replacement policies for a
motion picture exhibitor. Manufacturing and Services Operations Management 3: 369–386.
Vogel, H. (2007) Entertainment Industry Economics, 7th edn. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Walls, D. (1997) Increasing returns to information: evidence from the Hong Kong movie market. Applied
Economics Letters 4(5): 287–290.
Walls, D. (1998) Product survival at the cinema: evidence from Hong Kong. Applied Economics Letters 5:
215–219.
Walls, D. (2005a) Modelling heavy tails and skewness in film returns. Applied Financial Economics 15(17):
1181–1188.
Walls, D. (2005b) Modeling movie success when ‘nobody knows anything’: conditional stable distributional
analysis of film returns. Journal of Cultural Economics 29(3): 177–190.
Walls, D. (2005c) Demand stochastics, supply adaptation, and the distribution of film earnings. Applied
Economics Letters 12(10): 619–623.
Walls, D. (2008a) Economics of motion pictures. In S. Durlauf and L. Blume (eds), The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edn. New York: Macmillan.
Walls, D. (2008b) Cross-country analysis of movie piracy. Applied Economics 40: 625–632.
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
70 MCKENZIE
Weinstein, M. (1998) Profit sharing contracts in Hollywood: evolution and analysis. Journal of Legal Studies
27: 67–112.
Yamamura, E. (2008) Socio-economic effects of increased cinema attendance: the case of Japan. Journal of
Socio-Economics 37: 2546–2555.
Zuckerman, E. and Kim, T. (2003) The critical trade-off: identity assignment and box office success in the
feature film industry. Industrial and Corporate Change 12(1): 27–67.
Journal of Economic Surveys (2012) Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 42–70
C 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 14676419, 2012, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2010.00626.x by Hong Kong Metropolitan, Wiley Online Library on [04/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
