74
Journal of Marketing
Vol. 70 (July 2006), 74–89
© 2006, American Marketing Association
ISSN: 0022-2429 (print), 1547-7185 (electronic)
Yong Liu
Word of Mouth for Movies: Its
Dynamics and Impact on Box Office
Revenue
This article uses actual word-of-mouth (WOM) information to examine the dynamic patterns of WOM and how it
helps explain box office revenue. The WOM data were collected from the Yahoo Movies Web site. The results show
that WOM activities are the most active during a movie’s prerelease and opening week and that movie audiences
tend to hold relatively high expectations before release but become more critical in the opening week. More
important, WOM information offers significant explanatory power for both aggregate and weekly box office revenue,
especially in the early weeks after a movie opens. However, most of this explanatory power comes from the volume
of WOM and not from its valence, as measured by the percentages of positive and negative messages.
Yong Liu is Assistant Professor of Marketing, Martin J. Whitman School of
Management, Syracuse University (e-mail: yoliu@syr.edu). The author
thanks Chuck Weinberg, Dan Putler, Tridib Mazumdar, Amiya Basu,
Eunkyu Lee, and the participants at the 2004 Marketing Science Confer￾ence in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, for helpful comments on previous
drafts of the article. The author also thanks Dae-Yong Ahn (doctoral stu￾dent in Marketing, University of Texas at Austin) and Anindita Chakravarty
(doctoral student in Marketing, Pennsylvania State University) for valuable
research assistance.The author gratefully acknowledges financial support
from the Snyder Innovation Management Center at Syracuse University.
To read or contribute to reader and author dialogue on this article, visit
http://www.marketingpower.com/jmblog.
Word of mouth (WOM), or “buzz,” involves infor￾mal communication among consumers about
products and services. Two important features dis￾tinguish WOM from other information sources, such as
advertising: WOM is usually perceived as more credible
and trustworthy, and it is more readily accessible through
social networks (Banerjee 1992; Brown and Reingen 1987;
Murray 1991). A McKinsey & Company study found that
67% of the sales of consumer goods are based on WOM
(Taylor 2003).
In the arena of new product development, WOM may
play particularly important roles because awareness must be
built, and consumers need information when deciding
whether to purchase a product they do not know well
(Mahajan, Muller, and Kerin 1984). In the movie industry,
which has become a popular setting to examine various new
product issues (e.g., Elberse and Eliashberg 2003; Krider
and Weinberg 1998; Lehmann and Weinberg 2000; Sawh￾ney and Eliashberg 1996), hundreds of new films are
released annually by Hollywood and independent filmmak￾ers. In general, it is believed that WOM strongly influences
people’s movie selection (Austin 1989; Bayus 1985; Faber
and O’Guinn 1984; Neelamegham and Chintagunta 1999).
Indeed, the box office success of several movies, such as
The Blair Witch Project, My Big Fat Greek Wedding, and
Star Wars: Episode 1–The Phantom Menace, has been
attributed to the WOM that these movies generated.
This study makes use of a data set containing actual
WOM information to study the dynamic patterns of movie
WOM, the explanatory power of WOM for box office reve￾nue, and the potential antecedents of WOM. It adds to the
growing literature on movie marketing and provides
insights into new product development, entertainment mar￾keting (Eliashberg and Shugan 1997), services marketing,
and WOM research in general.
The WOM data were collected from the Yahoo Movies
message board (see http://movies.yahoo.com/). It contains
more than 12,000 posted messages, which were coded into
weekly measures of volume and valence before being
empirically examined. This study attempts to provide
answers to the following questions: First, in markets in
which the product has a low price and prerelease informa￾tion is abundant (e.g., massive prerelease advertising, exten￾sive professional reviews), how active is WOM before
release, and is there any consistent shift in consumer
evaluation of a new product before introduction (i.e., expec￾tations) versus after introduction (i.e., experience based)?
Second, to what extent do important measures of WOM
help explain the sales of a new product, both periodically
and in aggregation? Third, what factors consistently func￾tion as antecedents of WOM across time periods? If WOM
is important for the success of a new product, firms should
try to understand and manage these antecedents.
Advances in communications technology, especially the
Internet, have made it extremely easy to share information
with other people. Numerous Web sites provide message
boards and information threads for users to post informa￾tion and exchange opinions. This not only increases the
likelihood of consumers using WOM in decision making
but also provides an opportunity for researchers to gather
actual WOM information. Nevertheless, few published
studies have used these data, with the notable exception of
Godes and Mayzlin (2004b), who study WOM of television
shows from the Usenet newsgroups. Through regressions
Word of Mouth for Movies / 75
across weeks and shows, they empirically test the relation￾ship between WOM (measured in volume and dispersion
across different newsgroups) and weekly ratings. They find
that the dispersion measure, but not volume, has significant
explanatory power for ratings.
The current study differs from that of Godes and May￾zlin (2004b) in several ways. First, in addition to volume,
the role of valence, which is coded on the basis of the con￾tent of each WOM message, is investigated in detail. Sec￾ond, many of the results provide insights into the prerelease
period of a new product, which is critical in markets, such
as movies, in which early sales are of great concern. Third,
in addition to the relationship between WOM and sales, the
dynamic patterns of WOM (i.e., how it evolves and its
potential antecedents) are investigated. Finally, the research
context is different. Unlike network television shows, which
normally run on a seasonal basis, movies have very short
life cycle in theaters. They also have unique industrial fea￾tures that offer interesting research questions and require
special considerations in empirical analysis; for example, a
lot of weight is placed on the opening week, and a mini￾mum number of weeks are usually specified in exhibition
contracts (De Vany and Walls 1999).
Theoretical Background
Although successful movies can generate great box office
revenue and profits, the movie industry is also known for
high risks. Of any ten major films produced, six to seven are
unprofitable (Vogel 2001, p. 35; see also Shugan 1995).
Two characteristics of the movie industry contribute to the
popular belief that WOM influences moviegoers. First, as a
prime category of popular culture goods, movies tend to
receive great public interest and attention. Therefore, active
interpersonal communication about movies can be expected
to exist and, as indicated by the theory of information
accessibility and influences (Chaffee 1982), may influence
the audience. Second, the intangible and experiential nature
of movie consumption makes it difficult to judge movie
quality before it is actually viewed. When the alternatives
are difficult to evaluate before purchase, consumers often
engage in WOM to gather more information (Bristor 1990;
Harrison-Walker 2001; Rogers 1983).
Volume and valence are among the most important
WOM attributes that have been examined (e.g., Mahajan,
Muller, and Kerin 1984; Mizerski 1982; Neelamegham and
Chintagunta 1999). Volume measures the total amount of
WOM interactions. Valence captures the nature of WOM
messages (i.e., whether they are positive or negative).
Mainly because of data availability, most extant studies
examine either volume or valence, but not both. For exam￾ple, Anderson (1998) and Bowman and Narayandas (2001)
focus exclusively on the volume of WOM.
Two previous studies use controlled laboratory settings
to investigate how WOM is related to certain behavioral
features of moviegoers. In particular, Faber and O’Guinn
(1984) examine how much credibility and importance col￾lege students attach to WOM versus other information
sources. Burzynski and Bayer (1977) study how WOM
moderates people’s liking of a film. Several studies that
1On a more technical level, the data are collected from the
Yahoo Movies message board, which is characterized as a “com￾munity” site that allows bilateral discussions in a threaded manner
(see http://movies.yahoo.com/). Dellarocas, Awad, and Zhang’s
(2004) and Duan, Gu, and Whinston’s (2005) data come from the
“User Review” section of Yahoo Movies, where users can post a
numerical rating, a written review, or both.
focus on other issues of the movie market have included
various proxy measures of WOM as covariates (e.g.,
Elberse and Eliashberg 2003; Neelamegham and Chinta￾gunta 1999; Zufryden 1996). Two other independently con￾ducted studies also use data from Yahoo Movies. Dellaro￾cas, Awad, and Zhang (2004) use a Bass diffusion model to
examine how user ratings posted in the opening week help
explain the two Bass parameters (p = the external influence
factor, and q = the internal influence factor), which are esti￾mated from the box office history of a movie sample. They
find that the volume of the first week’s user ratings and their
density (defined as a ratio between the volume of ratings
and the first week’s box office revenue), but not the numeri￾cal value of these ratings, are useful in explaining p. How￾ever, the value of user ratings becomes a significant
explanatory variable for q. Duan, Gu, and Whinston (2005)
use similar user-ratings data but focus on the correlation
between the daily measures of these ratings and the daily
box office revenue in the first two weeks. They find that
user ratings have no explanatory power for box office reve￾nue, but the volume of ratings does.
There are several important differences between the cur￾rent study and those of Dellarocas, Awad, and Zhang (2004)
and Duan, Gu, and Whinston (2005). First, this study disen￾tangles the weekly effects of WOM in a way similar to
Eliashberg and Shugan (1997) and Basuroy, Chatterjee, and
Ravid (2003). This is useful given that different weeks are
considered of different importance in the movie industry,
and many managerial decisions are made on a weekly basis.
Second, the data contain WOM information in the pre￾release period, which can be used to explain and predict the
movie’s opening-week box office revenue. An important
managerial value of prerelease WOM is that it can help
improve the early forecast of opening-week box office and
aggregate box office revenue. Third, this study investigates
the potential antecedents of WOM, which provide useful
implications for both WOM research and managerial prac￾tice. Finally, because the data are coded into weekly mea￾sures, it is possible to examine how WOM evolves over
time.1
Extant studies have found that the volume of WOM cor￾relates significantly with consumer behavior and market
outcome (Anderson and Salisbury 2003; Bowman and
Narayandas 2001; Van den Bulte and Lilien 2001). The rea￾son that is often advanced to explain why the pure volume
of WOM matters is consumer awareness. For example,
Godes and Mayzlin (2004b) suggest that the more conver￾sation there is about a product, the more likely someone is
to be informed about it, thus leading to greater sales. On the
basis of a similar rationale, research that uses diffusion
models often examines WOM by either the number of
76 / Journal of Marketing, July 2006
2A caveat is that some audiences might have the chance to
watch a sneak preview of a to-be-released movie. However, sneak
previews are conducted only for selected movies, in few cities, and
for a small number of people. The vast majority of moviegoers
would not have experienced the movie before its release.
adopters (Neelamegham and Chintagunta 1999) or the
interaction between the number of adopters and that of non￾adopters (Zufryden 1996). In this article, the effect of vol￾ume is called the “informative” effect on awareness.
Positive WOM typically gives either a direct or an indi￾rect recommendation for product purchase. Negative WOM
may involve product denigration, rumor, and private com￾plaining. The reason valence matters is relatively straight￾forward; positive WOM enhances expected quality (and,
thus, consumers’ attitudes toward a product), whereas nega￾tive WOM reduces it. In this article, the effect of valence is
called the “persuasive” effect on attitude.
Although volume and valence are among the most
important measures of WOM in the literature, other mea￾sures, such as duration, intensity, and dispersion, exist
(Eliashberg et al. 2000; Godes and Mayzlin 2004b).
Because these measures are difficult to construct from the
current data, this study focuses on volume and valence. 
The effects and potential antecedents of movie WOM
are investigated by examining three important aspects of a
movie’s run: the opening week, the weeks after opening,
and aggregate box office revenue. Previous studies that have
adopted similar approaches include those of Elberse and
Eliashberg (2003), who separate the opening week from
remaining weeks, and Eliashberg and Shugan (1997), who
examine the effects of critical reviews in each of the first
eight weeks after a movie’s release and on aggregate box
office revenue.
Comparison of WOM Before and After Release
Opposite theories exist about the degree of WOM activities
before a movie’s release. Several factors suggest that pre￾release WOM is minimal. First, the price of watching a
movie is relatively low for an average consumer; the aver￾age movie admission was $6 in 2003 (Motion Picture Asso￾ciation 2003). The low cost, coupled with moviegoing often
being an impulse decision, implies that potential movie￾goers may not go through an intensive decision-making
process in which a large amount of information, such as
WOM, is needed. Second, most movies are released after
intensive prerelease advertising. Advertising, which is
mainly done in newspapers and on television, typically
amounts to 50% of the production budget (Vogel 2001, p.
96). It provides information about the opening date, main
cast, some of the storyline, critical opinions (in a selected
fashion), and, in many cases, whether the movie is to be
released nationwide “in a theater near you” or only “in
selected cities.” Critical reviews also provide useful infor￾mation to moviegoers and can be easily obtained from
many media channels (Faber and O’Guinn 1984; Litwak
1986). Because movie critics are mostly independent from
the studios, their reviews could offer supplementary value
to advertising. If massive advertising and active critical
reviews can meet potential moviegoers’ need for informa￾tion and thus be an effective substitute for WOM, the
amount of WOM in the prerelease period should be mini￾mal (Chaffee 1982). Finally, it is conceivable that the actual
experience with a product may function as an important
stimulus for WOM communication (Anderson 1998). Thus,
the volume of WOM could be expected to be significantly
large only after many moviegoers have seen the movie in
the opening week.2
Conversely, as discussed previously, movies are popular
cultural goods with an intangible/experiential nature, which
increases the likelihood that prerelease WOM is active.
Because WOM comes from other moviegoers, it may also
be perceived as more trustworthy than advertising (Faber
and O’Guinn 1984), and it may better reflect popular taste
than critical reviews (Holbrook 1999). As a result, although
abundant information about a to-be-released movie is pro￾vided by advertising and critical reviews, WOM may still be
perceived as useful and thus serve as a complement to
rather than a substitute for other information sources. This
study relies on an empirical approach to examine how
active WOM is during the prerelease phase of a movie and
how it compares with WOM in the opening week.
By its very nature, advertising will be positive about a
new movie. Notably, Eliashberg and Shugan (1997) find
that critical reviews are also mostly positive. To the extent
that these sources of information influence moviegoers, the
valence of prerelease WOM for an average movie should be
mainly positive. After a movie is released, actual experience
will come into play to influence WOM valence further.
Abundant research indicates that consumer satisfaction is
influenced by the confirmation or disconfirmation of expec￾tations (Anderson 1973; Oliver 1980; Olson and Dover
1979). Because the viewing public holds a comparatively
high expectation for a to-be-released movie, the likelihood
of disconfirmation is greater. In turn, this may result in a
decrease in the positivity of WOM. Lieberman and Esgate
(2002) make a similar argument for movie trailers and inter￾active games; that is, because trailers and games create high
expectations before release, viewers are more likely to be
disappointed after seeing the movie and talk unfavorably
about it. Thus:
H1: The valence of prerelease WOM is mainly positive, and
the valence of WOM in the opening week is less positive
than that of prerelease WOM.
Weekly Box Office Revenues
Figure 1 presents a conceptual framework that integrates
WOM into an otherwise familiar picture of the movie mar￾ket (Elberse and Eliashberg 2003; Lehmann and Weinberg
2000). The extant literature consistently finds that the num￾ber of screens on which a movie is shown strongly influ￾ences box office revenue in a given week (e.g., Swami,
Eliashberg, and Weinberg 1999). Evidence also indicates
that critical reviews correlate with weekly box office reve￾nue, though previous studies have reported mixed findings
about the significant level of this correlation and when it
exists in a movie’s run (Basuroy, Chatterjee, and Ravid
Word of Mouth for Movies / 77
FIGURE 1
A Conceptual Framework of Movie Box Office Sales
2003; Eliashberg and Shugan 1997; Reinstein and Snyder
2005). Whereas the number of screens captures distribution
intensity (and, thus, the audiences’ accessibility to movies),
critical reviews and WOM constitute most of the third-party
information that moviegoers may use. Unlike critical
reviews, which are static and occur mostly before the movie
is released, WOM is a dynamic phenomenon that begins
before release and spans the entire run. Thus, it is important
to measure WOM periodically.
If WOM is able to influence consumer decisions, incor￾porating WOM into extant models that have the number of
screens and critical reviews as explanatory variables
(Basuroy, Chatterjee, and Ravid 2003; Eliashberg and
Shugan 1997) will enhance the models’ explanatory power
for weekly box office revenue. This is especially true if
WOM functions as a complement to critical reviews. An
additional factor contributing to the explanatory power of
WOM beyond that of the number of screens is the reality of
overcapacity in movie theaters. The movie exhibition indus￾try has been known for serious oversupply of theaters and
seats. A series of articles that appeared in Forbes (Ackman
2001a, b; Schiffman 2000) estimate that the average capac￾ity utilization of movie theaters is less than 20%. Although
the number of screens picks up a large amount of variance
in box office sales, the inclusion of additional factors that
influence moviegoers (e.g., WOM) can explain more vari￾ance through capturing the increase in capacity utilization
inside theaters.
The two measures of WOM, volume and valence, influ￾ence moviegoers through different cognition–behavior
routes (Figure 2). As discussed previously, the volume of
WOM mainly has an informative role to enhance consumer
awareness.3 The greater the volume of WOM, the more
likely a consumer will be to hear about it. Not surprisingly,
greater awareness tends to generate greater sales.
3A few studies have found that the number of arguments in a
persuasive message may influence persuasion, but the nature of
this influence depends on situational factors, such as the level of
involvement and the strength of the arguments. For example, Petty
and Cacioppo (1984) suggest that the number of arguments serves
as a simple persuasive cue for low-involvement situations, but a
larger number of arguments may enhance issue-relevant thinking
when involvement is high. For WOM in general and for movie
WOM in particular, the overall degree of consumer involvement
and the factors that drive it remain to be studied. Moreover, it is an
interesting issue whether the findings regarding multiple argu￾ments in one persuasive message are applicable to a context simi￾lar to movie WOM, in which WOM messages come from different
senders and usually advance different opinions. However, note that
the informative effect proposed in the literature (e.g., Godes and
Mayzlin 2004b; Neelamegham and Chintagunta 1999; Zufryden
1996) always occurs as moviegoers are exposed to WOM.
Notes: MPAA = Motion Picture Association of America.
78 / Journal of Marketing, July 2006
Conversely, the role of WOM valence, because of its
positive/negative nature, is more of a persuasive one that
influences consumer attitude. Although it is relatively
straightforward to postulate that positive WOM enhances
attitude and negative WOM reduces it, whether this effect
can be unambiguously transformed into actual box office
sales is unclear. Indeed, behavioral research has found that
attitude does not always predict behavior well (Ajzen and
Fishbein 1980) and that situational factors may influence
behavior beyond what attitude can explain.
In the movie market, the link between attitude and
behavior is further weakened when moviegoing occurs
impulsively. Moreover, unlike other consumer goods that
remain in the market for a long time so that consumers have
sufficient time to act on the desire to purchase them, movies
are in theaters only for a short time. Along this line, Sawh￾ney and Eliashberg (1996) distinguish between the time to
decide whether to watch a movie and the time to act on this
decision.
Therefore, a positive relationship between WOM vol￾ume and box office revenue is postulated. However, because
of the weak link between attitude and behavior, the relation￾ship between WOM valence and box office revenue may be
insignificant.
H2: WOM has significant explanatory power for box office
revenue in the subsequent period. Whereas the effect of
WOM volume should be significantly positive, that of
WOM valence may be insignificant.
Aggregate Box Office Revenue
The overall performance of movies, as measured by aggre￾gate box office revenue, is a critical issue in the industry.
Beyond the weekly effects discussed in the previous sec￾tion, it is useful to examine whether prerelease WOM (i.e.,
the buzz that accumulates before the opening week) can
help explain aggregate box office revenue. The importance
of accumulated buzz before a movie’s release has attracted
much interest in both academic research (Elberse and
Eliashberg 2003) and the popular press (King 2003). If
WOM is informative about weekly box office revenue and
if WOM activities can correlate between adjacent weeks,
prerelease WOM will help explain/predict aggregate box
4Other variables, such as Motion Picture Association of Amer￾ica (MPAA) ratings, directors, distributors, and whether the movie
is a sequel, are potential explanatory variables for aggregate box
office revenue. However, most studies failed to find these variables
to be significant (e.g., Elberse and Eliashberg 2003; Litman 1983).
These were also included in the estimation and were found to be
insignificant as well. Thus, they are not included in the analyses
reported here.
office revenue. In line with previous discussions, the effect
of the volume of prerelease WOM is expected to be signifi￾cantly positive, but that of the valence may be insignificant.
As do studies that examine aggregate sales of movies
and other entertainment products (Litman 1983; Reddy,
Swaminathan, and Motley 1998), this study uses factors
that are constant across the movies’ run as explanatory
variables. In addition to prerelease WOM, this study links a
movie’s aggregate box office revenue to factors including
star power, genre, production budget, critical reviews, and
the opening strength of the movie.4 Eliashberg and Shugan
(1997) examine the effects of critical reviews on aggregate
box office revenue and find that though the percentage of
positive reviews is a significant predictor, the volume of
reviews is not. The role of star power, genre, and production
budget has been examined in a few studies, but the results
are mixed (Basuroy, Chatterjee, and Ravid 2003; Elberse
and Eliashberg 2003; Litman 1983).
Opening strength refers to the number of screens in the
first few weeks of a movie’s run. A wide opening strategy
may generate higher total sales because greater accessibility
better appropriates the public interest in a movie that has
accumulated before release. However, opening wide may
also merely shift future demand into early weeks if the
overall demand is not increased. If audiences are not stimu￾lated enough by a wide opening to go to theaters early and
if the number of screens drops quickly, total sales will be
negatively influenced. The business press suggests that
movies are increasingly opening wide (King 2001).
H3: Prerelease WOM offers significant explanatory power for
aggregate box office revenue. However, most of the
explanatory power comes from its volume, not its valence.
Volume
Valence
WOM
Awareness
Attitude
Cognitive
Consequences
Box office
sales
+ +
+ ?
Observed Behavioral
Consequences
FIGURE 2
The Impact of WOM Measures on Potential Moviegoers
Word of Mouth for Movies / 79
5Movie advertisements also display critical reviews from time
to time. However, such displays are highly selective; only positive
evaluations, such as “two thumbs up,” are displayed. To the extent
that consumers understand this selective process, the impact of
critical reviews through movie advertisements should decrease
(Taylor 2003).
Potential Antecedents of WOM
The double-lined arrows in Figure 1 illustrate the factors
that are potential antecedents of WOM. These include five
groups of factors: movie genres, Motion Picture Association
of America (MPAA) ratings, whether major stars are in the
cast, critical reviews, and the WOM measures in the previ￾ous week. Movie genres (e.g., action, drama, horror) clas￾sify movies on the basis of their storyline, and MPAA rat￾ings (G, PG, PG-13, and R) classify movies on the basis of
content, primarily according to the suitability of the movie
to different audience segments. As a communication
process, WOM activities can be influenced by the strength,
inherent interestingness, and possibly the controversy of the
topic. Movies with certain genres (e.g., action, adventure)
and MPAA ratings (e.g., R, which requires a parental
guardian for moviegoers under the age of 17) may be asso￾ciated with distinctive patterns of WOM behavior, espe￾cially during the prerelease period when the curiosity about
movies is high.
The phenomenon of star power is substantial in the
entertainment sector. Movie stars are the frequent topic of
interpersonal communication among moviegoers. Thus, the
existence of stars is likely to correlate with WOM activities.
Because the literature is inconclusive about the role of
movie stars on box office revenue and because Hollywood
seems to promote a culture of stars despite the high pressure
faced by studios to control production budgets (Vogel
2001), either a confirmation or a disconfirmation of the
impact of star power on WOM would be valuable.
Critical reviews are usually published in major newspa￾pers, in magazines, and, increasingly, on movie Web sites.
They may influence moviegoers’ expectations of a film and
thus correlate with WOM. However, such influence may
exist only if the majority of movie audiences read these
reviews. Because there is no published evidence about the
size or the demographic features of those who read critical
reviews, it is difficult to speculate on the significance of the
correlation between reviews and WOM.5 Although most
critical reviews begin circulating before a movie’s opening
week, the data do not contain information about the exact
time the reviews became available. To reduce any ambiguity
in the analysis for the prerelease period, critical reviews are
included as a potential antecedent of WOM only in a
movie’s opening week and the weeks after it.
Extant studies advance the theory that WOM can be
viewed as a consequence of social networks; thus, it is con￾tagious and persistent (Banerjee 1992; Brown and Reingen
1987; Murray 1991). This indicates that on the aggregate
level, WOM in adjacent weeks will be positively correlated.
From a behavioral point of view, active WOM during a
6Note that this carryover effect does not require the volume of
WOM to keep increasing over time. There are other factors that
may function as antecedents of WOM, such as weekly advertising
spending and whether the movie is a sequel. The data do not con￾tain sufficient information or variance to investigate these factors.
This is an issue for further research.
7A few other Web sites (e.g., IMDB.com) also provide user
comments about movies. However, these Web sites do not attract
as many visitors as Yahoo Movies (Graser 2002). Furthermore, in
general, they do not provide functions similar to Yahoo Movies,
which allows threaded message posting and replying. Collecting
and organizing the postings from these other sites are more diffi￾cult. For example, the user comments on IMDB.com are not num￾bered, thus increasing the difficulty of an already tedious data￾processing task. To the extent that no significant difference exists
period helps promote awareness and interest in a movie;
therefore, more people will see the movie in the next period
and subsequently talk about it. This can happen for two rea￾sons: First, greater WOM makes the memory of the movie
last longer, thus increasing the likelihood that a moviegoer
will talk about the movie after seeing it. Second, the per￾ceived social benefit of talking about a popular subject (i.e.,
movie) tends to be greater than talking about a less popular
one (Brown and Reingen 1987).
The data can be used to examine the aggregate effect of
this temporal correlation. That is, a week with greater
WOM activities is more likely to be followed by another
week of active WOM than is a week with less WOM. This
phenomenon is called a “carryover” effect of WOM, which,
in the context of this study, refers to the possibility that
WOM activities in a week correlate with WOM in the sub￾sequent week.6 H4: Movie genres, MPAA ratings, star power, and critical
reviews are among the potential antecedents of movie
WOM. A dynamic carryover effect exists between WOM
activities in adjacent weeks.
Empirical Analysis and Discussion
of Results
Data and Variables
The WOM data are collected from the Yahoo Movies mes￾sage board (http://movies.yahoo.com/). There are several
reasons Yahoo Movies serves as a good source of movie
WOM. First, it is one of the most popular movie Web sites.
Variety (Graser 2002) reports that Yahoo Movies has the
largest number of unique visitors among its Web competi￾tors. Second, Yahoo Movies requires no access fee for either
browsing or posting a message. This helps reduce any pos￾sible bias in the demographic composition of the Web site’s
visitors. Third, the structure of the Web site is well designed
so that finding and collecting information is straightfor￾ward, thus reducing possible errors during data collection.
Finally, WOM messages are archived and indexed numeri￾cally by the dates when they were posted. Thus, it is possi￾ble to track the period in the movie’s run to which a particu￾lar message belongs.7 The prerelease period is from the date
80 / Journal of Marketing, July 2006
8An alternative method is to use the absolute numbers of posi￾tive and negative messages, either individually or together with the
volume of messages. However, note that doing so does not clearly
separate the volume effect from the valence effect and may pro￾duce spurious results, because both numbers are significantly cor￾related with the total volume. For example, using the number of
negative reviews to explain box office revenue always yields a
positive sign, indicating that the effect of total volume may domi￾nate the valence effect. Using the numbers of positive and negative
messages together with the volume produces an unacceptable vari￾ance inflation factor, a strong signal for multicollinearity. There￾fore, in this study, the analysis and discussion are restricted to the
volume measure and the valence measures that are defined as
percentages.
when the first WOM message about a movie is posted to the
date before the official movie release. It captures the accu￾mulation of WOM before the movie opens.
Coding WOM messages into valence is an extremely
tedious task that poses serious constraint on the amount of
data that can be studied. To cope with this difficulty, this
study focuses on movies released during a five-month
period (May–September) in 2002. After excluding titles for
which there is no reliable information about all control
variables, the final data set contains 40 movies, with 12,136
WOM messages to be coded.
Three judges independently read each of the 12,136
messages and assigned them to one of five categories: posi￾tive, negative, mixed, neutral, and irrelevant. The messages
classified as positive or negative either show clear overall
assessment of the movie or provide direct recommenda￾tions. A message is classified as mixed if it expresses posi￾tive opinions about some aspects of the movie but negative
opinions about others and if there is no clear overall assess￾ment. A message is classified as neutral if it talks about the
movie but does not provide any positive or negative com￾ments. Finally, a message is classified as irrelevant if it is
not related to the movie itself. The three independent cod￾ings are integrated using the majority rule: If at least two
judges assign the same category, that category is used for
the message. If all three judges disagree, the message is
coded as disagree. The level of disagreement among the
three judges was very low (approximately 4% for all the
weeks examined). For example, for WOM posted during the
opening week, the judges did not achieve a majority agree￾ment for only 4.1% of all messages. The data require the
use of aggregate measures for WOM valence. Consistent
with previous studies that involve valence coding (Basuroy,
Chatterjee, and Ravid 2003; Eliashberg and Shugan 1997),
the valence of WOM is measured in two dimensions: the
percentage of positive messages and the percentage of nega￾tive messages.8
Other data come from various public sources. The
weekly box office revenue and number of screens are col￾lected from Variety magazine, as are the critical reviews.
Eliashberg and Shugan’s (1997) method to calculate the
total number of reviews, the percentage of positive reviews
(CRPRO), and the percentage of negative reviews
(CRCON) is used. Similar to their data, an extremely high
correlation exists between CRPRO and CRCON (–.878, p <
.0001). As a result, these data must be included separately
in the estimation. Production budget comes from another
popular movie Web site, The Numbers (see www.the￾numbers.com), and MPAA ratings and movie genres are
collected from the Internet Movie Database (http://
us.imdb.com). Star power is based on the star list published
annually by Premier; a movie is classified as having star
power if at least one of its cast members appears in “The
Power List 2002.” Table 1 provides the basic summary sta￾TABLE 1
Key Summary Statistics of the Movie Sample
Variable Median M SD
Box office (aggregate) $41,986,198 $67,005,348 $56,681,186
Ratio of opening week to aggregate box office 43.1% 41.0% 14.3%
Exhibition longevity (in weeks) 15.0 15.5 4.89
Production budget $48,000,000 $51,650,000 $30,955,344
Screens in opening week 2633.5 2518.9 890.3
Volume of total WOM messages 139.5 303.4 411.8
Volume of WOM (prerelease) 45.5 84.6 89.1
Percentage of positive WOM (prerelease) 27.3% 28.5% 12.5%
Percentage of negative WOM (prerelease) 9.1% 10.5% 8.2%
Volume of WOM (opening week) 49.0 94.8 134.5
Percentage of positive WOM (opening week) 20.3% 23.8% 11.9%
Percentage of negative WOM (opening week) 13.3% 16.1% 13.5%
Volume of critical reviews 16.5 16.3 4.1
Percentage of positive reviews 28.1% 36.9% 28.7%
Percentage of negative reviews 32.5% 37.6% 30.6%
Notes: Total number of movies = 40. Total number of WOM messages analyzed = 12,136.
in the demographic profiles of visitors to these movie Web sites,
using data from Yahoo Movies can be fairly representative. Never￾theless, it is acknowledged that compiling data from different Web
sites and examining their differences and the collective influence
on product sales could be potentially useful.
Word of Mouth for Movies / 81
9Note that for both WOM and critical reviews, the percentage of
positive comments and the percentage of negative comments do
not add up to 100%, because other categories (e.g., mixed) exist
when the valence measures are constructed. It is also interesting
that WOM is less often positive or negative than critical reviews.
This happens because critical reviews tend to give clear overall
assessments, but WOM is more likely to be ambiguous.
0
20
40
60
80
100
0246 8
Week
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
0246 8
Week
Positive Negative
FIGURE 3
Dynamic Patterns of WOM for the Movie Sample
A: The Average Volume of WOM
B: The Average Valence Measures
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
.25
.3
.35
01234567 8 Negative
Positive
Week
01
01234567 8
Positive Negative
Week
1.2
.8
.6
.4
.2
FIGURE 4
Valence of WOM for Movies xXx and 
Scooby-Doo
xXx
Scooby-Doo
tistics of the sample.9 Following the work of Eliashberg and
Shugan (1997) and Basuroy, Chatterjee, and Ravid (2003),
and in light of the varying exhibition longevities among the
40 movies, empirical analyses are conducted for the first
eight weeks in the movies’ run. This covers most of the
interesting periods for the movies; the first eight weeks
account for 97% of the box office revenue in the data.
Dynamic Features of Movie WOM
For illustrative purposes, Figure 3 plots how volume and
valence change over time, beginning with the prerelease
period (Week 0), then the opening week (Week 1), and so
on. Figure 4 further provides plots for two specific movies,
xXx and Scooby-Doo, to illustrate different patterns of the
valence measures.
Figure 3, Panel A, reveals that movie WOM is the most
active during the prerelease period and the opening week,
and then gradually decreases. For the 40 movies in the sam￾ple, most movies (i.e., 23) have their greatest WOM volume
during the prerelease period, and 15 movies have the most
active WOM during the opening week. Compared with all
other periods, the opening week has the greatest volume of
WOM; on average, 94.8 WOM messages per movie are
posted. The volume of prerelease WOM is slightly lower
but is still very high; on average, 84.6 messages are posted
during this period. The average volume drops significantly
to 36.6 in the second week and continues to decrease.
Therefore, although other information sources are abun￾dant and most moviegoers have not watched the movies,
WOM is very active in the prerelease period. It suggests
that WOM is more of a complement to other information
sources than a substitute. This finding lends direct support
to the hypothesis that WOM can be a useful measure to
explain box office sales. It also implies that instead of being
Volume Percentage
Percentage Percentage
82 / Journal of Marketing, July 2006
TABLE 2
List of Variables Used in the Analyses
Variable Name Meaning
t (subscript) Week number in movie’s life span (t = 0 is prerelease)
CONST The constant intercept in the regression models
CRCON Percentage of negative critical reviews
CRPRO Percentage of positive critical reviews
GACADV Movie genre is action/adventure
GCOMEDY Movie genre is comedy
GSCIFI Movie genre is science fiction
LNAGEt Average age of the top 20 movies in week t (in natural log)
LNCRITIC Number of critical reviews (in natural log)
LNMSGt Number of WOM messages in week t (in natural log)
LNNEWt Number of new releases among the top 20 movies in week t (in natural log)
LNPROD Value of production budget of the movie (in natural log)
LNREVt Box office revenue in week t (in natural log)
LNSCRN1–4 Number of screens in the first four weeks after opening (in natural log)
LNSCRNt Number of screens in week t (in natural log)
MPAA-PG Movie is rated PG in MPAA ratings
MPAA-R Movie is rated R in MPAA ratings
NEGPERt Percentage of negative WOM in week t
POSIPERt Percentage of positive WOM in week t
STAR There are major stars in the movie
based on actual experiences with a movie, prerelease WOM
can be fairly speculative in nature.
Figure 3, Panel B, indicates that the valence measures
have a different pattern from that of volume. Although there
are variations in positive and negative percentages from
week to week, such changes in terms of direction and mag￾nitude appear to be rather random. Furthermore, the average
percentage of positive WOM is greater than that of negative
WOM in the early periods, especially during prerelease. To
quantify this finding further, each movie is examined indi￾vidually. During the prerelease period, the percentage of
positive WOM is greater than the percentage of negative
WOM by a margin of 5% for as many as 31 movies. These
margins are within 5% of each other for 8 movies, and only
in one case (for the movie The Banger Sisters) does the per￾centage of negative WOM exceed that of positive WOM by
5%.
Figure 3, Panel B, also indicates that movie audiences’
expectations about a typical movie (before release) are usu￾ally higher than what they think in the opening week. In
particular, the percentage of positive WOM begins at a
comparatively high level during prerelease and drops to a
lower level in the opening week. At the same time, the per￾centage of negative WOM begins at a comparatively low
level during prerelease but increases to a higher level in the
opening week. Among the movies in the sample, the WOM
for about half (19 movies) drops by more than 5% from pre￾release to the opening week. The other movies either have
comparable levels of positive WOM between the two peri￾ods (11 movies) or have more positive WOM during the
opening week (10 movies), and 17 movies have their nega￾tive WOM increase by more than 5% from prerelease to the
opening week (e.g., xXx), whereas only 6 movies have
noticeable decreases in negative WOM (e.g., Scooby-Doo).
Thus, there is support for H1, which postulates that
WOM tends to be positive in the prerelease period but
becomes less so in the opening week. In addition to illus￾trating the confirmation or disconfirmation theory of expec￾tations in the context of movies, these results imply a poten￾tial drawback of intensive advertising. That is, advertising
may generate awareness for new products, but it may also
attract nontarget consumers who are more likely than others
to spread negative WOM. In the movie market, these are the
people who normally would not like a particular movie.
This problem is of greater concern when retailers (theaters)
would have kept the product longer if WOM were more
positive. As a result, seeking ways to make advertising
more targeted should be of considerable value. Without the
concern about negative WOM, a firm would want the
“wrong” buyers to buy because they still generate addi￾tional revenue.
The remaining part of this section discusses three sets of
analyses of how the measures of WOM help explain weekly
and aggregate box office revenue and what constitutes
potential antecedents of WOM. To cope with potential non￾linearity, double log specifications are used for the regres￾sion equations; natural logarithms are taken for variables
that could take unbounded positive values. The terms
LNMSGt
, POSIPERt
, and NEGPERt are used to denote vol￾ume (in natural logarithms) and valence (in percentages) of
WOM in week t (t = 0 indicates the prerelease period). Two
weekly variables are included to control for the effects of
competition; one is the number of new releases among the
top 20 movies, and the other is the average age, measured in
weeks, of the top 20 movies (for a discussion about why
these factors may capture the effect of competition, see
Elberse and Eliashberg 2003). In all estimations, multi￾collinearity is tested for by calculating the variance inflation
factor. The variables used produced acceptable variance
inflation factor values. Table 2 lists all the variables, and
Table 3 provides the correlation matrix among WOM mea￾sures for a movie’s prerelease and opening week. Similar
Word of Mouth for Movies / 83
LNMSG0 POSIPER0 NEGPER0 LNMSG1 POSIPER1 NEGPER1
LNMSG0 1.000 — — — ——
POSIPER0 –.312 1.000 — — — —
(.050)
NEGPER0 .026 –.265 1.000 — — —
(.873) (.098)
LNMSG1 .764 –.034 –.007 1.000 — —
(.000) (.835) (.965)
POSIPER1 .053 .211 –.197 –.025 1.000 —
(.746) (.191) (.223) (.880)
NEGPER1 –.216 .036 .267 –.071 –.426 1.000
(.180) (.825) (.096) (.664) (.006)
Notes: p values are in parentheses.
TABLE 3
Correlation Matrix for Prerelease and Opening Week WOM
10In an effort to test and control for any effects that might be
caused by unobservable variables, the estimation of a set of movie￾specific information, such as movie genres, MPAA ratings, pro￾duction budget, whether a movie is a sequel, and whether there are
major stars or directors, is included. However, these variables are
mostly insignificant. Thus, they are omitted from the final model
of estimation.
patterns exist for the remaining weeks. The most significant
correlation exists between LNMSG1 and LNMSG0, imply￾ing the possibility of a carryover effect.
WOM and Weekly Box Office Revenue
To examine the weekly effects of WOM, the following
model is estimated:
for each week separately (t = 1, 2, …, 8), where i indexes
the movies (i = 1, 2, …, 40) and is omitted hereafter to
avoid notation clutter. The covariates include the number of
screens (LNSCRNt), critical reviews (LNCRITIC,
CRPRO), and the degree of competition (LNNEWt,
LNAGEt
). This specification is similar to that of Eliashberg
and Shugan (1997) and Basuroy, Chatterjee, and Ravid
(2003), except for the additional (lagged) WOM measures
and the two competition variables.10
Table 4 reports the weekly regression results. All the
regressions achieved high levels of model fit, and all the
significant parameters have expected signs. For the opening
week, the joint F test shows that the measures of WOM
have significant explanatory power for box office revenue.
However, whereas the volume of WOM (LNMSG0) is
highly significant (p < .001), the valence measures
(POSIPER0 and NEGPER0) are not. In other words, almost
all the explanatory power that WOM brings to the estima-
( ) , 1 1 21 LNREV CONST a LNSCRN a LNMSG it it i t =+ +
+ − aa POSIPER a NEGPER
a LNCRITI
it it 3 14 1
5
, , − − + + CC a CRPRO a LNNEW
a LNAGE
ii t
t it
+ +
+ +
6 7
8 ε ,
11A question here is whether the volume of WOM is merely
picking up the effects of advertising. To examine this issue, data
on the advertising budget for each movie were collected and
included in weekly regressions with WOM. The estimation results
remain similar, and the volume of WOM is still highly significant.
Thus, movie WOM offers explanatory power for weekly box
office revenue beyond that of advertising.
tion comes from its volume but not its valence. The estima￾tion for the next four weeks (Week 2–Week 5) yields the
same results; that is, the volume of WOM (LNMSGt–1) is
highly significant, but the valence (POSIPERt–1 and
NEGPERt–1) is not. At Week 6, the effect of volume
becomes marginal and then disappears. This happens
because WOM activities are gradually reduced as people
lose interest in a movie during subsequent weeks. Thus, the
increasingly sparse and irregular WOM fails to provide
informative measures for weekly box office revenue. For
example, there are only 5.1 WOM messages posted per
movie in Week 6, compared with 94.8 in the opening week.
As a result, H2 is supported, but only for the early weeks.
This is particularly enlightening because most of the box
office sales occur in these weeks; for the movies in the data,
the first five weeks contribute to 91.3% of aggregate box
office revenue.11
To examine the robustness of these results, especially
the insignificance of valence, which might be particularly
surprising, several further analyses were conducted. A typi￾cal reason for the lack of significance is that the sample size
may not have been sufficiently large. Whereas the number
of movies that can be analyzed is practically constrained by
the labor-intensive coding process, the sample size is still
comparable to those of extant studies. For example, Godes
and Mayzlin (2004b) analyze 41 television shows;
Lehmann and Weinberg (2000) use 35 movie and video
titles; Eliashberg and Shugan (1997) analyze 56 movies;
and Dellarocas, Awad, and Zhang (2004) use 25 movies in a
ratings survey and then 80 movies for box office analysis
(40 movies for estimation and 40 for prediction). Neverthe￾less, a pooled regression was conducted to examine whether
84 / Journal of Marketing, July 2006
Week (t)
CONST
LNSCRNt
LNMSGt – 1
POSIPERt – 1
NEGPERt – 1
LNCRITIC
CRPRO
LNNEW
LNAGE
Model fit F
(p value)
Adjusted R2
Joint F test of
WOM 
measures
1
7.273
(.000)**
.566
(.000)**
.592
(.000)**
.784
(.257)
.059
(.952)
.759
(.018)**
.695
(.019)**
–.111
(.505)
.146
(.760)
44.87
(.000)
.902
14.01
(.000)
2
9.346
(.000)**
.401
(.006)**
.345
(.000)**
–.300
(.674)
–1.369
(.092)*
1.106
(.001)**
.398
(.235)
.005
(.984)
–.339
(.516)
16.86
(.000)
.765
9.64
(.000)
3
6.449
(.000)**
.673
(.000)**
.366
(.000)**
.812
(.133)
–.610
(.264)
.894
(.020)**
.688
(.076)*
.153
(.494)
.022
(.972)
22.70
(.000)
.820
10.87
(.000)
4
8.171
(.000)**
.985
(.000)**
.275
(.005)**
.186
(.603)
.445
(.309)
.343
(.323)
.728
(.047)**
–.251
(.127)
–1.378
(.045)**
27.50
(.000)
.855
4.01
(.017)
5
6.469
(.000)**
.973
(.000)**
.387
(.000)**
.342
(.312)
.385
(.136)
.421
(.137)
.736
(.009)**
–.136
(.423)
–.681
(.140)
50.37
(.000)
.925
10.48
(.000)
6
4.981
(.015)**
1.050
(.000)**
.169
(.0103)
.045
(.910)
–.173
(.620)
.657
(.192)
.340
(.336)
–.086
(.738)
–.039
(.964)
23.58
(.000)
.862
1.07
(.382)
7
.594
(.000)**
1.379
(.000)**
–.088
(.449)
–.185
(.497)
–.265
(.399)
.358
(.228)
.386
(.288)
.073
(.711)
–1.510
(.097)*
69.04
(.000)
.954
.43
(.735)
8
4.067
(.317)
1.185
(.000)**
.144
(.362)
.118
(.715)
–.605
(.655)
.561
(.369)
.307
(.454)
–.112
(.682)
.060
(.963)
22.45
(.000)
.905
.53
(.672)
*p < .10.
**p < .05.
Notes: The dependent variable is LNREVt. p values are in parentheses.
TABLE 4
The Effects of WOM Communication on Weekly Box Office Revenue
12Note that a pooled regression, though it offers a greater num￾ber of observations and thus increases the chance of a parameter to
be significant, has its limitations. It estimates the average effect
across all periods. Thus, it is not particularly useful if there is a
significant difference of the estimated effects in different periods.
the insignificance of WOM valence can be attributed to
sample size. To do so, all the weekly data of the 40 movies
were pooled to regress weekly box office revenue on the
explanatory variables. With 378 observations, the pooled
regression achieved a high level of model fit (adjusted R2 =
.95). However, the results remain the same; that is, the vol￾ume of WOM is highly significant, but valence is not.12
It is also possible that the valence of WOM works dif￾ferently for movies that receive mostly positive WOM and
those that receive mostly negative WOM. A relevant argu￾ment is the diminishing impact of incremental WOM mes￾sages. If the overall WOM information about a movie is
positive, the addition of another positive message may not
be as influential as the addition of a negative one. The
reverse is true for a movie that has overall negative WOM.
Thus, estimating all movies together might have neutralized
the impact of the valence measures. This argument moti￾vated an examination of the impact of WOM by conducting
separate regressions on different movie groups (especially
those that received mostly positive WOM and those that
received mostly negative WOM). The results of WOM vol￾ume and valence remain unchanged.
In addition to the examination of weekly box office
revenue, an analysis was conducted for aggregate box office
revenue using prerelease WOM and other control variables;
valence measures were again found to be insignificant.
Finally, various model specifications, such as linear and
semilog, were examined, and all lead to qualitatively simi￾lar results.
Therefore, the results confirming H2 appear to be fairly
robust. They suggest that though WOM is a useful informa￾tion source in the movie market, it correlates with box
office revenue mainly through an informative role on
awareness but not a persuasive path of attitude changes. In
addition to the theoretical reasons discussed previously
regarding the weak correlation between attitude and behav￾ior, whether a person likes a particular movie is (to a large
extent) an issue of personal taste, which lends additional
support to this finding. It is clear that WOM increases
awareness among potential moviegoers, which is confirmed
by the highly significant effect of volume, but when it
comes to deciding whether to watch a particular movie, to
what extent should another person’s subjective assessment
be reflective of the WOM recipient’s own taste? If the belief
that a bad (good) movie for one person may be enjoyable
(not enjoyable) to another is sufficiently strong, or if the
WOM receiver attributes the valence of WOM to the taste
of the message sender (see Eagly, Wood, and Chaiken
Word of Mouth for Movies / 85
TABLE 5
Prerelease WOM and the Aggregate Box Office
Revenue (LNGROSS)
Independent Parameter t-Value
Variables Estimates (p Value)
CONST 8.875 3.95 (.000)**
LNSCRN1–4 .516 2.50 (.018)**
LNPROD –.015 –.10 (.921)
LNMSG0 .589 4.65 (.000)**
POSIPER0 .342 .44 (.667)
NEGPER0 –.515 –.44 (.665)
LNCRITIC .579 1.74 (.093)*
CRPRO 1.069 3.21 (.003)**
STAR .168 .96 (.346)
GSCIFI –.194 –.84 (.409)
GACADV –.164 –.86 (.394)
Joint test (LNMSG0 = POSIPER0 = NEGPER0 = 0): F =
9.49 (p < .001)
Model fit: F = 13.79 (p < .001), adjusted R2 = .77
*p < .10.
**p < .05.
[1978] and other studies on attribution theory), the valence
will lose much of its influence. This explanation is consis￾tent with several previous studies on WOM. For example,
Russell, DeCarlo, and Ramaswami (2001) find that when
message receivers attribute the negativity of WOM to the
communicator, brand evaluations actually increase.
The finding that WOM operates mainly through
increased awareness and the argument that the experiential/
intangible nature of movie consumption enhances the need
for WOM lead to an interesting prediction; namely, the
effect of WOM on to-be-released sequel movies should be
less than that on nonsequels because moviegoers have more
information about and experience with sequels as a result of
the mostly successful prequels. This difference should be
the most obvious in the opening week when box office reve￾nue is the greatest and when the WOM effect is highly
significant.
To examine this prediction, regressions similar to those
reported in Table 4 could be conducted for sequel and non￾sequels separately. However, the small number of sequels in
the data (there were only 3) prevents estimations for com￾pletely separated samples. Thus, a different test was used.
In particular, the opening-week regression was conducted
for nonsequels only (37 movies), and whether the effect of
volume was greater than that based on all 40 movies was
observed. The parameter LNMSGt – 1 was .6044 for non￾sequels but .5917 for all movies. Because the estimations
are based on double log specifications, this seemingly small
difference actually implies that the average volume of
WOM during prerelease yields 6% more box office revenue
in the opening week for nonsequels than for all movies
combined (i.e., 84.6.6044 – .5917 = 1.06). For the average
opening-week revenue of $27.01 million in the sample, this
is a $1.62 million difference. This difference is especially
significant considering that the test is less powerful than a
direct comparison between sequels and nonsequels and that
it is based on merely 3 of the 40 movies.
For the early weeks, inclusion of the WOM measures
produced noticeably better model fit than the previous stud￾ies that used only the remaining explanatory variables.
From Week 1 to Week 5, the average enhancement of model
fit measured by adjusted R2 is 17%.
WOM and Aggregate Box Office Revenue
Table 5 presents the results of regressing aggregate box
office revenue (LNGROSS) on prerelease WOM and other
covariates. The opening strength of movies is measured as
the total number of screens in the first four weeks; this
accommodates the industry practice of adopting a minimum
number of screens in exhibition contracts for the first few
weeks (for similar issues, see De Vany and Walls 1999) and
reduces any possible biases associated with the movies that
do not achieve the widest distribution in the opening week.
The LNSCRN1–4 turns out to be highly significant; the
wider distribution a movie has in the first four weeks, the
greater the aggregate box office revenue will be. The per￾centage of positive reviews (CRPRO) has a significant,
positive impact. The volume of critical reviews
(LNCRITIC) is also significant, but only marginally. These
results are similar to those that Eliashberg and Shugan
(1997) report. Movie stars (STAR) or movie genres are not
found to be informative of aggregate box office revenue.
The three measures of WOM are highly significant as a
group, confirming the value of using prerelease buzz to
explain overall box office performance. As with the weekly
analysis, whereas the volume of WOM (LNMSG0) is the
most significant among all explanatory variables, the
valence measures (POSIPER0 and NEGPER0) are not sig￾nificant. Thus, H3 is strongly supported. An important
managerial value of this finding is that the amount of pre￾release buzz can be a useful indicator of the ultimate box
office performance. The effectiveness of box office forecast
models (e.g., Sawhney and Eliashberg 1996) can be
improved by including actual prerelease WOM information.
Potential Antecedents of WOM
As discussed previously, prerelease WOM can be related to
three groups of factors: movie genres, MPAA ratings, and
whether major stars are in the cast. Beginning with the
opening week, WOM can also be related to critical reviews
and the WOM in the previous week. Because volume is the
most critical factor that correlates with box office revenue,
it is the focus of the subsequent analyses. Analyses for the
valence measures (POSIPERt and NEGPERt
) were also
conducted, but they could not be consistently explained by
various models in almost all the periods. Table 6 summa￾rizes the results.
All the regressions for prerelease and the eight weeks
achieved significant model fit. During the prerelease period,
it appears that action and adventure movies tend to receive
higher-than-average WOM communication, whereas R￾rated movies tend to receive less. Beginning with the open￾ing week, the only explanatory variable that is consistently
significant is the volume of WOM in the previous week
(LNMSGt–1). This shows the carryover effect such that a
86 / Journal of Marketing, July 2006
Week (t)
0 (Pre￾release)
1 (Open￾ing Week) 2345678
CONST 3.817
(.000)**
.615
(.680)
–.243
(.868)
1.380
(.323)
–.456
(.838)
–4.320
(.164)
4.086
(.133)
4.351
(.326)
.066
(.911)
GACADV .555
(.045)**
–.143
(.615)
–.075
(.764)
–.448
(.046)**
–.152
(.688)
.295
(.444)
–.181
(.549)
.340
(.467)
—
GCOMEDY –.330
(.279)
–.358
(.278)
.343
(.231)
–.633
(.008)**
.458
(.284)
.136
(.712)
.140
(.734)
.601
(.496)
—
MPAAPG .668
(.104)
–.684
(.141)
.343
(.364)
.418
(.192)
–.303
(.597)
.618
(.258)
.095
(.892)
–1.823
(.237)
–.834
(.197)
MPAAR –.913
(.009)**
–.322
(.370)
.753
(.028)**
–.346
(.165)
.408
(.377)
–.047
(.913)
–.098
(.811)
.225
(.720)
–.452
(.463)
STAR .408
(.162)
.343
(.269)
–.109
(.694)
.469
(.068)*
.136
(.765)
–.145
(.762)
.806
(.095)*
.558
(.489)
—
LNMSGt – 1 — 1.169
(.000)**
.929
(.000)**
.715
(.000)**
.986
(.000)**
1.037
(.000)**
.625
(.000)**
.915
(.001)**
.595
(.031)**
POSIPERt – 1 — 1.997
(.125)
–1.148
(.309)
1.149
(.114)
.102
(.917)
1.984
(.048)**
–1.888
(.014)**
1.206
(.340)
2.067
(.049)**
NEGPERt – 1 — 2.405
(.190)
–2.085
(.098)*
–1.988
(.008)**
–.735
(.602)
1.889
(.041)**
–.698
(.236)
2.603
(.349)
.512
(.781)
LNCRITIC — –.834
(.132)
–.115
(.810)
–.442
(.367)
.039
(.963)
.808
(.476)
–1.375
(.203)
–2.211
(.275)
—
CRPRO — .792
(.165)
.302
(.573)
.897
(.038)**
–.965
(.214)
.929
(.182)
1.099
(.220)
1.759
(.373)
—
Model fit F 
(p value)
4.36
(.004)
7.53
(.000)
9.78
(.000)
16.22
(.000)
3.69
(.006)
5.78
(.001)
5.75
(.003)
3.41
(.094)
2.89
(.067)
Adjusted R2 .301 .626 .698 .813 .464 .648 .683 .617 .371
*p < .10.
**p < .05.
Notes: The dependent variable is LNMSGt. p values are in parentheses. In Week 8, movie genre, star power, and critical reviews are excluded
because of high multicollinearity.
TABLE 6
Potential Antecedents of the Volume of WOM
13Although the existence of movie stars and the measures of
critical reviews do not significantly predict WOM, there are
caveats regarding the roles of stars and movie critics. For example,
some movie stars and critics may be on television or radio shows
to talk about a to-be-released movie, which may lead to greater
WOM. Furthermore, some stars may have popular Web sites,
which also may influence WOM. An indicator variable of star
power, albeit a typical approach in the literature, may not com￾pletely capture the effects of these scenarios (e.g., whether a par￾ticular movie has been promoted by its stars on popular television
shows).
week of active WOM is likely to be followed by another
week of active WOM. However, consistent patterns linking
WOM valence in a previous week to WOM volume in the
current week were not found. Table 6 also indicates that star
power is insignificant in explaining the volume of WOM
during the prerelease period and most of the subsequent
weeks. In addition, WOM is not significantly influenced by
critical reviews, confirming the previous result that WOM
and critical reviews are more of complements to each other
than substitutes.13
Regarding H4, consistent support was found for the car￾ryover effect. The effects of other factors (e.g., movie genre,
MPAA ratings) are mixed and mostly insignificant. Man￾agerially speaking, these results point to the challenge that
studios may face when trying to create and manipulate
WOM by working on factors such as star power and movie
genres (Rosen 2000). They also point to the importance of
managing WOM early on, preferably beginning in the pre￾release period. After WOM is created, a high volume of
WOM, which is beneficial to sales, tends to positively affect
the volume of WOM in subsequent periods.
Summary, Managerial Implications,
and General Discussion
This study contributes to the movie-marketing and WOM
literature by examining movie WOM. Among other things,
the mechanism through which WOM functions and the
extent to which WOM helps explain box office sales are
investigated. The data and analyses show that movie WOM
is active during a movie’s prerelease period and that WOM
is more of a complement to other information sources than
a substitute. Movie audiences tend to hold comparatively
high expectation before a movie is released but become
more critical in the opening week. The volume of WOM
(but not the valence) offers significant explanatory power
for box office revenue, both in the aggregate and for the
early weeks, in support of a theory that WOM functions in
the movie market primarily through an informative effect
on awareness.
Word of Mouth for Movies / 87
The finding that WOM is very active during the pre￾release period implies that at least for entertainment goods,
such as movies, WOM communication about a to-be￾released new product may not depend on actual experience.
Many potential users talk about the product on the basis of
speculations. In this sense, managing buzz should be treated
as a multidimensional task that extends beyond the new
product itself. That is, management needs to be conscious
about additional things that influence speculations, such as
the firm’s other products (both new and extant), the firm’s
reputation, various events, and possibly “rumors” that occur
during the new product development process.
These findings highlight the need for studio and theater
managers to observe and respond to WOM communications
actively, especially during a movie’s early weeks when
most of the box office revenue is generated. However, what
ultimately matters is the volume of WOM. It may not be
critical to track information similar to the valence measures.
Practically, volume can be measured either directly by a
precise number, as this study does, or indirectly by proxies,
such as the degree of public interest a movie receives, how
widespread the communication occurs across demographic
groups, and so on. These findings offer considerable sup￾port to the idea that firms should try to create active WOM
communication among potential users (Godes and Mayzlin
2004a; Rosen 2000).
Another important managerial value of these findings is
that WOM can be a useful measure to help forecast box
office sales. Among other things, good forecasts help stu￾dios and theaters better plan screening capacity and poten￾tially optimize exhibition contracts. However, it is not the
purpose of this study to develop a full forecasting system.
Rather, this study can be used to illustrate how the perfor￾mance of a forecasting model can be improved by including
actual WOM information. To do so, this study used the set
of independent variables and adopted the standard
calibrating-forecasting approach. Because the sample size
makes it difficult to split the data into an estimation sample
and a prediction sample, a rotating method was used to con￾duct the calibration and forecasting tasks. Specifically, each
of the 40 movies is taken in turn as the movie to be pre￾dicted, while the other 39 movies are used in the calibration
process to generate parameter estimates. The absolute per￾centage errors of the 40 predictions are then averaged as the
indication of prediction effectiveness. The calibration pre￾diction is conducted for both aggregate box office revenue
and the opening-week box office revenue. The WOM mea￾sures are included in the proposed model but not in the
benchmark model. Other independent variables are the
same as those that appear in Tables 4 and 5.
This analysis shows that including WOM in the fore￾casting system significantly reduces forecasting errors by
31% for a movie’s opening week (from a 55% absolute
forecasting error with the benchmark model to 38% with
the proposed model) and 23% for the aggregate box office
revenue (from 61% to 47%). Different from most extant
studies, these forecasts are made purely on the basis of the
prerelease information of a new movie. This is probably the
most difficult forecast task for movies (Sawhney and
Eliashberg 1996). It is similar to Sawhney and Eliashberg’s
(1996) BOXMOD-I model when no revenue data for the
new movie are available and a meta-analysis procedure is
employed. Sawhney and Eliashberg report an average
71.1% prediction error for the aggregate box office revenue.
Although the actual improvement through incorporating
WOM depends on what forecasting system is eventually
used, the added value of WOM appears to be significant.
As in previous studies (Basuroy, Chatterjee, and Ravid
2003; Eliashberg and Shugan 1997; Godes and Mayzlin
2004b), the current analysis focuses on statistical correla￾tions between variables and uses these temporal relation￾ships to infer how WOM may influence box office sales.
Although these correlations offer interesting insights and
useful managerial implications, further research might
investigate the degree of causality, perhaps with more disag￾gregated data and different methodologies. In this regard,
lab experiments could be a useful approach to examine the
relationships such as those that Figure 2 illustrates.
Online user-generated information offers unique oppor￾tunities for research in marketing. Such data come in differ￾ent formats, which render them suitable for different
research purposes. Some data, such as the WOM messages
used herein, are actual individual postings. Although their
unstructured nature provides great flexibility for the analy￾sis, coding them can be a difficult task. Other data, such as
online user ratings, contain less flexibility but make it easier
to conduct large-scale cross-sectional studies. Another issue
involved with this growing literature is how similar the
online information is to what occurs in the physical world.
There is evidence that the degree of such similarity can be
very high (Dellarocas, Awad, and Zhang 2004). Neverthe￾less, further research examining the difference between
online user data and that in the physical context appears to
have potential.
REFERENCES
Ackman, Dan (2001a), “Disaster of the Day,” Forbes, (January
23), (accessed March 21, 2006), [available at http://www.
forbes.com/2001/01/23/0123disaster.html].
——— (2001b), “Movie Theaters of the Absurd,” Forbes, (March
2), (accessed March 21, 2006), [available at http://www.forbes.
com/2001/03/02/0302movies.html].
Ajzen, Icek and Martin Fishbein (1980), Understanding Attitudes
and Predicting Social Behavior. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pren￾tice Hall.
Anderson, Eugene (1973), “Consumer Dissatisfaction: The Effect
of Disconfirmed Expectancy on Perceived Product Perfor￾mance,” Journal of Marketing Research, 10 (February), 38–44.
——— (1998), “Customer Satisfaction and Word of Mouth,”
Journal of Service Research, 1 (1), 5–17.
——— and Linda Salisbury (2003), “The Formation of Market￾Level Expectations and Its Covariates,” Journal of Consumer
Research, 30 (June), 115–24.
88 / Journal of Marketing, July 2006
Austin, Bruce (1989), Immediate Seating: A Look at Movie Audi￾ences. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Banerjee, Abhijit (1992), “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (3), 797–817.
Basuroy, Suman, Subimal Chatterjee, and S. Ravid (2003), “How
Critical Are Critical Reviews? The Box Office Effects of Film
Critics, Star Power, and Budgets,” Journal of Marketing, 67
(October), 103–117.
Bayus, Berry (1985), “Word of Mouth: The Indirect Effect of Mar￾keting Efforts,” Journal of Advertising Research, 25 (3), 31–39.
Bowman, D. and D. Narayandas (2001), “Managing Customer￾Initiated Contacts with Manufactures: The Impact on Share of
Category Requirements and Word-of-Mouth Behavior,” Jour￾nal of Marketing Research, 38 (August), 281–97.
Bristor, Julia (1990), “Enhanced Explanation of Word of Mouth
Communications: The Power of Relationships,” in Research in
Consumer Behavior, E.C. Hirschman, ed. Greenwich, CT: JAI
Press, 51–83.
Brown, Johnson and Peter Reingen (1987), “Social Ties and Word￾of-Mouth Referral Behavior,” Journal of Consumer Research,
14 (December), 350–62.
Burzynski, Michael and Dewey Bayer (1977), “The Effect of Posi￾tive and Negative Prior Information on Motion Picture Appre￾ciation,” Journal of Social Psychology, 101, 215–18.
Chaffee, Steven (1982), “Mass Media and Interpersonal Channels:
Competitive, Convergent, or Complementary?” in Inter/Media:
Interpersonal Communication in a Media World, Gary
Gumpert and Robert Cathcart, eds. New York: Oxford Univer￾sity Press.
Dellarocas, Chrysanthos, Neveen Awad, and Michael Zhang
(2004), “Exploring the Value of Online Reviews to Organiza￾tions: Implications for Revenue Forecasting and Planning,”
working paper, MIT Sloan School of Management.
De Vany, Arthur and David Walls (1999), “Uncertainty in the
Movie Industry: Does Star Power Reduce the Terror of the Box
Office?” Journal of Cultural Economics, 23 (4), 285–318.
Duan, Wenjing, Bin Gu, and Andrew Whinston (2005), “Do
Online Reviews Matter? An Empirical Investigation of Panel
Data,” working paper, Department of Management Science and
Information Systems, University of Texas at Austin.
Eagly, Alice, Wendy Wood, and Shelly Chaiken (1978), “Causal
Inferences about Communicators and Their Effects for Opinion
Change,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36
(April), 425–35.
Elberse, Anita and Jehoshua Eliashberg (2003), “Demand and
Supply Dynamics for Sequentially Released Products in Inter￾national Markets: The Case of Motion Pictures,” Marketing
Science, 22 (3), 329–54.
Eliashberg, Jehoshua, Jedid-Hah Jonker, Mohanbir Sawhney, and
Berend Wierenga (2000), “MOVIEMOD: An Implementable
Decision-Support System for Prerelease Market Evaluation of
Motion Pictures,” Marketing Science, 19 (3), 226–43.
——— and Steven Shugan (1997), “Film Critics: Influencers or
Predictors?” Journal of Marketing, 61 (April), 68–78.
Faber, Ronald and Thomas O’Guinn (1984), “Effect of Media
Advertising and Other Sources on Movie Selection,” Journal￾ism Quarterly, 61, 371–77.
Godes, David and Dina Mayzlin (2004a), “Firm-Created Word-of￾Mouth Communication: A Field-Based Quasi-Experiment,”
Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 05-023.
——— and ——— (2004b), “Using Online Conversations to
Study Word-of-Mouth Communication,” Marketing Science,
23 (4), 545–60.
Graser, Marc (2002), “Semel Gives Yahoo! the Business: Internet
Portal Ratchets Up H’wood Links,” Variety, (August 19–25),
11.
Harrison-Walker, L. Jean (2001), “The Measurement of Word-of￾Mouth Communication and an Investigation of Service Quality
and Customer Commitment as Potential Antecedents,” Journal
of Services Marketing, 4 (1), 60–75.
Holbrook, Morris (1999), “Popular Appeal Versus Expert Judg￾ments of Motion Pictures,” Journal of Consumer Research, 26
(September), 144–55.
King, Tom (2001), “Will ‘Harry’ Have Legs? After Record Open￾ing, Wizard Falls Off at the Box Office; Trying to Catch R2-
D2,” The Wall Street Journal, (November 30), W4.
——— (2003), “Now Playing Somewhere Else: Studios Try to
Build Buzz by Holding Films Back; in Muncie? Read a Book,”
The Wall Street Journal, (January 10), W10.
Krider, Robert and Charles Weinberg (1998), “Competitive
Dynamics and the Introduction of New Products: The Motion
Picture Timing Game,” Journal of Marketing Research, 35
(February), 1–15.
Lehmann, Donald and Charles Weinberg (2000), “Sales Through
Sequential Distribution Channels: An Application to Movies
and Videos,” Journal of Marketing, 64 (July), 18–33.
Lieberman, Al and Patricia Esgate (2002), The Entertainment
Marketing Revolution: Bring the Mogul, the Media, and the
Magic to the World. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Financial Times/
Prentice Hall.
Litman, Barry (1983), “Predicting Success of Theatrical Movies:
An Empirical Study,” Journal of Popular Culture, 16 (Spring),
159–75.
Litwak, Mark (1986), Reel Power: The Struggle for Influence and
Success in the New Hollywood. New York: William Morrow.
Mahajan, Vijay, Eitan Muller, and Roger Kerin (1984), “Introduc￾tion Strategy for New Products with Positive and Negative
Word-of-Mouth,” Management Science, 30 (12), 1389–1404.
Mizerski, Richard (1982), “An Attribution Explanation of the Dis￾proportionate Influence of Unfavorable Information,” Journal
of Consumer Research, 9 (3), 301–310.
Motion Picture Association (2003), U.S. Entertainment Industry:
2003 MPA Market Statistics. Encino, CA: Motion Picture
Association.
Murray, Keith (1991), “A Test of Services Marketing Theory:
Consumer Information Acquisition Activities,” Journal of Mar￾keting, 55 (January), 10–25.
Neelamegham, Ramya and Pradeep Chintagunta (1999), “A
Bayesian Model to Forecast New Product Performance in
Domestic and International Markets,” Marketing Science, 18
(2), 115–36.
Oliver, Richard (1980), “Conceptualization and Measurement of
Disconfirmation Perceptions in the Prediction of Consumer
Satisfaction,” in Proceedings of Fourth Annual Conference on
Consumer Satisfaction, Dissatisfaction, and Complaining
Behavior, H. Hunt and R. Day, eds. Bloomington: Indiana Uni￾versity School of Business.
Olson, J. and P. Dover (1979), “Disconfirmation of Consumer
Expectation Through Product Trial,” Journal of Applied Psy￾chology, 64 (April), 179–89.
Petty, Richard and John Cacioppo (1984), “The Effects of Involve￾ment on Responses to Argument Quantity and Quality: Central
and Peripheral Routes to Persuasion,” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 46 (January), 69–81.
Reddy, Srinivas, Vanitha Swaminathan, and Carol Motley (1998),
“Examining the Determinants of Broadway Show Success,”
Journal of Marketing Research, 35 (August), 370–83.
Reinstein, David and Christopher Snyder (2005), “The Influence
of Expert Reviews on Consumer Demand for Experience
Goods: A Case Study of Movie Critics,” Journal of Industrial
Economics, 53 (1), 27–51.
Rogers, Everett (1983), Diffusion of Innovations. New York: The
Free Press.
Rosen, Emanuel (2000), The Anatomy of Buzz: How to Create
Word-of-Mouth Marketing. New York: Doubleday.
Word of Mouth for Movies / 89
Russell, Laczniak, Thomas DeCarlo, and Sridhar Ramaswami
(2001), “Consumers’ Responses to Negative Word-of-Mouth
Communication: An Attribution Theory Perspective,” Journal
of Consumer Psychology, 11 (1), 57–73.
Sawhney, Mohanbir S. and Jehoshua Eliashberg (1996), “A Parsi￾monious Model for Forecasting Gross Box-Office Revenues of
Motion Pictures,” Marketing Science, 15 (2), 113–31.
Schiffman, Betsy (2001), “Movie Theaters Stuck in Stone Age,”
Forbes, (September 22), (accessed March 21, 2006), [available
at http://www.forbes.com/2000/09/23/0923newmedia.html].
Shugan, Steven (1995), Service Strategy. Homewood, IL: Richard
D. Irwin.
Swami, Sanjeev, Jehoshua Eliashberg, and Charles Weinberg
(1999), “SilverScreener: A Modeling Approach to Movie
Screens Management,” Marketing Science, 18 (3), 352–72.
Taylor, John (2003), “Word of Mouth Is Where It’s At,”
Brandweek, (June 2), 26.
Van den Bulte, Christophe and Gary Lilien (2001), “Two-Stage
Partial Observability Models for Innovation Adoption,” work￾ing paper, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
Vogel, Harold (2001), Entertainment Industry Economics: A
Guide for Financial Analysis, 5th ed. Cambridge, UK: Cam￾bridge University Press.
Zufryden, Fred (1996), “Linking Advertising to Box Office Perfor￾mance of New Film Releases: A Marketing Planning
Approach,” Journal of Advertising Research, 36
(July–August), 29–41.
