The Movies
Arthur De Vany∗
Professor Emeritus
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
April 19, 2005
Abstract
This chapter is an overview of a new kind of economics of the movies; it
also is my attempt to lay a new foundation of the economics of art and culture.
The essence of cultural goods is that the are creative goods that have no natu￾ral limit on their consumption or dissemination; they are information goods.
And they are wildly uncertain. I show how this vision may be implemented
in a rigorous and insightful way in the study of the movies. A centerpiece of
the analysis is the stable Paretian hypothesis and its usefulness as a model of
motion picture revenues, costs, and returns. The industry’s organization, con￾tracts, pricing, and compensation deals are also seen as rational adaptations
to the uncertainty captured by the stable Paretian probability model.
The essence of the stable Paretian model is that the probabilities of mo￾tion picture outcomes are far from Normal. The tails of the stable Paretian
distribution are “heavy” and large scale events are far more probable in a
Paretian than in a Gaussian world. The large events far out on the probability
tails dominate sample statistics. The variance is infinite and, for some vari￾ables, even the mean does not exist. Movie box office revenues, therefore,
have no natural size or scale and there is no typical or average movie; each is
unique unto itself. Revenue and cost dynamics are complex and expectations
of cost or revenue at level X are proportional to X.
JEL classification: C1, D0, D8, G0, G3, K2, Z1.
Key words: uncertainty, contracts, adaptive optimization, movies, extreme
events.
∗Without implicating him for my oversights and errors, I wish to thank Victor Ginsburgh for his
superb editing. My thanks also to Simon Anderson for his helpful comments. The Private Enterprise
Research Center of Texas A&M University supported my research.
1
1 Introduction
The movie business is hard to understand. It defies conventional economic models
on many levels. But, this is what makes it so interesting. I see the movie business
as a laboratory for developing a new kind of economics of art and culture. It is
an extraordinarily well-documented business, so there is a rich data base to be
exploited by researchers. Where else can you follow a product from birth to death
in a matter of weeks or months? Where else can you study the evolution of its
revenues and market penetration in such detail? And for so many products.
Studios get overnight reports of box office revenues. Weekly reports are avail￾able in industry trade publications, on internet sites, and on the evening news.
There are at least three proprietary data sources where the researcher can follow
statistics on a weekly or annual basis.1 And these data sources go back for years.
Detailed filmographies exist of casts, producers, and directors for virtually ev￾ery film ever released in North America. Because screen credits are so important in
the movies, filmographies are highly accurate. Their accuracy is insured because
craft unions have elaborate criteria for awarding screen credits. Where else can
you find so widely distributed such a careful documentation of creative work and
rigorous delineation of creative credits?
The industry requires all this information about box office returns and repu￾tation in order to solve the many vexing problems the industry faces. I think the
first order of business for research is to recognize that the movies are an informa￾tion industry, arguably the first of the twentieth century. The industry produces
information, for all that a film really is, and it lives on it. Without this elaborate
reporting of film revenues and reputations, the industry could not function. The
1A. C. Neilson/EDI (my primary source), Exhibitor Relations, and Paul Kagen are three pro￾prietary data sources. Industry publications, such as Variety, Hollywood Reporter, and Box Office,
report on the industry prolifically. The Internet Movie Data Base is a good source for filmographies
and various data as well.
2
reporting is required because nobody knows what a film will gross so the industry
has to have in place the instruments to adapt flexibly adjusting prices and supply
to demand when the audience reveals it. Reputation is crucial when artists and
creative inputs are hired for short periods of time and each can become the critical
input at some stage of production.
Movies are one-off products that only go around once. You do not know if you
will like a movie until you see it. If you like it, you tell your friends about it. This
simple act of sharing information leaves no less of the movie for you to enjoy and
may even increase your pleasure. This means information can be multiplied.
If information can be multiplied, motion pictures will have increasing returns.
Movies that have many viewers will grow more rapidly than movies that have few
viewers. The supply of theater seats is perfectly elastic because the run can be
extended to increase supply until it equals demand. This means box office revenue
is just a number, with no natural limit or scale. It turns out that scale-free dis￾tributions capture the statistics of movies with high fidelity. Because information
does not obey the usual laws of production, the statistics of the movies are rather
strange: distributions of variables are sharply peaked and skewed, with a long tail
to the right. They are scale-free and high on kurtosis.
The need to manage and adapt to information leads to interesting business prac￾tices and contracts. The industry is filled with colorful phrases and unusual con￾tracting practices like “four-walling”, “road shows”, “pay or play”, “house nut”,
“legs”, “blind-selling”, and “block-booking”. It is an extremely hierarchical busi￾ness, with a few movies, stars and directors standing far above the rest in box office
grosses. It is frighteningly risky, yet the rate of return is low. Most movies lose
money and a handful make nearly all the profit the industry earns.
Movies are produced in a novel way too. Producers assemble temporary teams
from a large pool of artists and craftsmen to make movies. These production teams
3
live only for the duration of the project and disband when the movie is finished.
At any point in time, just a few people in the industry are actually working. But, a
few well-connected actors and directors are very busy and they make most of the
movies that dominate box office revenues.
Most movies take several years to produce. There are many pitfalls along the
way and the final product is nothing more than a few reels of celluloid. All its
production costs are sunk by the time a movie is finished and ready to be released.
They may not be recoverable and a finished movie might never get a chance to be
seen on a theater screen. Cost is notoriously difficult to forecast and some movies
famously go far over budget. A studio can go broke if it goes just one year without
a hit. And movies are financed in unusual ways.
These are hard problems, but the hardest one of all is that nobody really knows
how much a movie will gross at the box office. If people in the industry did know,
there would be no need for its strange practices and they would disappear. It is
because “nobody knows” that the movie industry is so fascinating and so different
from dentistry or warehousing. It does have analogues though in other creative
activities that deal in information such as publishing, music, stage, and patents.
The emphasis on complex dynamics and their statistical basin of attraction that has
been the basis of a good deal of the work on the movies reviewed in this chapter
would appear to have a profitable use in other industries.2
“Nobody knows” is the core problem of the movie business. This is the prob￾lem almost all of the industry’s colorful and strange practices, contracts and busi￾ness organization are designed to solve. It is the source of its preoccupation with
rank and power and relationships. It elevates “the deal” to its mythical status in the
2
For example, F. M. Scherer (2000) has used the Bose-Einstein process David Walls and I used
to capture motion picture dynamics and the heavy-tailed distributions to which they are drawn to
explain the dynamics and size distribution of patent royalties. Didier Sornette and D. Zajdenweber
(1999) have shown that the innovation time series contains the same ragged profile typical of the
movies and other Levy Stable motions.
4
industry.
In this chapter, I shall try to use the ideas of sequential contracting and un￾certainty in cost and revenue to explain the movie business. In the process, I will
review some of the literature on the movies, but my intention is to reveal what light
these concepts shed on these issues rather than to survey the literature. There are
three bodies of research on the movie business; the old, the new, and what I call
the new-new.
The old research came out of the decade of the antitrust litigation that eventu￾ally led to the dissolution of the great studios (and to much antitrust involvement
in the movie business in other countries beyond the United States). The approach
was to apply conventional antitrust economics to the industry, seeing virtually all
its hard-to-fathom practices as attempts to exploit market power. This research is
exemplified by Michael Conant’s (1960) book, by the testimony in the Paramount
litigation (Federal Trade Commission, 1965 or the more recent book by Litman,
1990). The bulk of this research did not see the movie business as an information
industry and by incorrectly applying models suited to industrial products to this
new industry they failed to see the efficiency of the industry’s contracts and institu￾tions. This research often confuses demand with supply, as when Seagrave (1997)
says that Hollywood “dominates” the world’s movie screens. Large openings may
temporarily dominate theater screens, but that is supply, not demand. If demand
does not fill seats, theaters quickly drop a film for something more promising.
The old motion picture research has been tested and found wanting. In a de￾tailed analysis of the Paramount charges, De Vany and Eckert (1991) showed that
the industry’s organization and contracts were clever and necessary adaptations to
the nobody knows principle. De Vany and McMillan (2004) used stock market
prices to show that the forced divestment of theaters by the studios was a major
financial blow to the industry and that the pattern of losses among firms was in-
5
consistent with the idea that the industry had functioned as an implicit price-fixing
cartel (the primary basis of the court’s judgment). De Vany and Lee (2001) have
shown that market shares are wildly volatile and unstable and that the industry is
concentrated, as all information industries are, but the players at the top turnover
at a high rate.
The new motion picture research is a modern variant of the old. A number
of researchers have been drawn to study the industry (which is good), but have
brought with them tools that are, essentially, game-theoretic versions of the old
models. Papers have appeared that model the choice of opening date as a strate￾gic game among studios3
, entry and exit decisions of theaters are modeled as a
location game, and rental price differentials among theaters have been described
as (centralized) price discrimination (when they are determined in a completely
decentralized fashion by the audience under the terms of the exhibition license).
There is, of course, an element of truth in each of these points of view; studios
do try to avoid opening against a blockbuster. But, no one knows half of what the
models posit of the agents, which is more a criticism of the large information re￾quirements of standard models than of the research. Say, for example, you move
your opening two weeks later to avoid going against Titanic only to find that Ti￾tanic is just getting its legs and completely flattens your movie. The models (at
least those I have seen) do not correctly portray the uncertainty the agents face,
and it can be shown that models that are faithful to the complexity of the problem
are computationally intractable. I think the nobody knows principle cuts sharply
against this line of research. But, this is good for economics and will eventually
lead to progress.
The motion picture industry challenges equilibrium models and existing math￾ematics in fundamental ways that will require a new kind of modeling. The highly
3
See, Krider and Weinberg (1998). Liran Einav (unpublished) has made some progress in empir￾ically modeling motion picture release timing.
6
decentralized and adaptive mechanisms employed by the industry are difficult to
model in the centralized, strategic mindset typical of optimizing models. I believe
capturing the “wild” uncertainty and adaptive decision processes of creative indus￾tries provides a more rigorous and insightful basis for a new-new economics. By
bringing the “wild” uncertainty of creative enterprises to the forefront, the work I
report on here lays a foundation for a New Economics of Art and Culture.
A hint of the formidable challenge of understanding “wild” uncertainty in mo￾tion pictures and the way the movie business relies on adaptive and decentralized
mechanisms is developed in work I and colleagues have been doing. This work
is a continuation of ideas originally developed by Mandelbrot (1963) and Simon
(1955). The key ideas are that production is sequential and that there is a “wild”
kind of uncertainty in cost. Motion picture revenue (nobody knows) unfolds during
the run in a complex and recursive dynamic that can “go anywhere,” but the dynam￾ics converge on a statistical attractor, the L´evy stable distributions with “heavy”
(non-Gaussian) tails. These properties set the information discovery and contract￾ing problems that are at the core of the industry’s structure, contracts, and organi￾zation.
This research is statistical in nature, emphasizing the complexity of motion
picture revenue and cost dynamics and their basins of attraction. It is focused
on a characterization of the sources and nature of the uncertainty which is then
used to discover the problems to which the industry’s organization, contracts, and
practices must be adapted. This line of inquiry was originated by De Vany and
Eckert (1991) and pinned down by De Vany and Walls (1996) and famously named
the “nobody knows” principle by Richard Caves (2000) in his Creative Industries
(after screenwriter William Goldman’s line “With all due respect, nobody knows
anything.” in his Adventures in the Screen Trade, 1983). Cassey Lee’s doctoral
dissertation (Lee, 1999)) was one of the first explorations of the stable Paretian
7
hypothesis in motion pictures, which lies at the core of this line of work. Other
papers have appeared in this vein recently by Chris Hand (2001), Collins, Hand,
and Snell (2003), and Jordi McKensie (2003). John Sedgewick’s (2001) book on
British filmgoing during the 1930’s is also very much in this vein.4 This is the line
of research I shall emphasize in this chapter because I believe it is foundational to
the development of a New Economics of Art and Culture.
In Section 2 I begin with a discussion of the essential economics of the busi￾ness. This is Movie Economics 101 and its aim is to identify the main issues that
confront the business and show how they are solved; you will see that the movie
business shares many features and practices of other creative industries for they
are all information industries. Following this, in Section 3, I apply these ideas to
a brief historical analysis of the movie business. The purpose here is to show how
the industry’s methods of production, its structure and regional distribution, and
its exotic contracts and practices evolved historically as solutions to many of its
more vexing problems. You will see that the judges and lawyers relied on concepts
more suited to toasters and bricks than to one of the first information industries—
the movies. In this section, I also cover the Paramount antitrust cases and show
how the courts reshaped this nascent information industry in the mode of the old
economics of antitrust.
Section 4 covers the graduate level course in movie economics. It begins with
the laws of the box office and with a discussion of the L´evy stable distribution.
(Since we will often be interested in the upper of lower tails of this distribution
and these tails are Pareto distributions, I shall freely interchange the terms stable
Paretian distribution and L´evy stable distribution, letting the context indicate if the
4
In David Walls’ (2002) review of Sedgewick (2001) he shows that the distribution of
Sedgewick’s index of film popularity is a Pareto law of the form found for thedistribution of mo￾tion picture revenue by the above cited authors. I will show below that this is an example of the
self-similarity of statistical distributions implied by the stable Paretian hypothesis.
8
tail or whole distribution is at issue.) The laws of the box office are those of a
winner-takes-all contest. The laws are driven by a non-linear information dynamic
that takes movies that are close to one another and propels them apart at exponential
speed. Under the influence of these recursive and non-linear processes, movie
revenues can “go anywhere.” They may even be chaotic. The extreme skew of
the revenue distribution, the influence of extreme events, and the unstable and non-
finite moments provide a rigorous basis for the nobody knows principle. I show that
the stable Paretian model captures with high fidelity all the essential features of the
statistics of the business. I use the concept of statistical self-similarity to show
the importance of extreme events in all facets of the industry from film revenues
to budgets, productivity, pay, and careers. The influence of marketing and stars
and the opening are discussed here in terms of the non-linearity of the revenue
dynamics of motion picture information. In this section I show how pay keys on
extreme events and I reveal the laws of stardom.
Other topics taken up in the graduate course are the structure of the industry
implied by the stable Paretian hypothesis and the evidence for it, the pricing of
talent, and the many decision problems that are engendered by the wild statistics
of the movies. I introduce the concept of stochastic industry structure and use it
to show that concentration measures are not well-founded in this industry. I show
the industry is stochastically concentrated, but intensely competitive. Leaders turn
over at a high rate and the Hershman-Hirfindahl index, a gold standard for an￾titrust, does not even exist. Then I discuss the difficulties of making decisions in a
business where the probabilities are non-Gaussian and confound expectations. The
stable Paretian probabilities lie somewhere between risk and uncertainty and they
lead to many decision errors. I explain the “curse of the superstar”, the “angel’s
nightmare”, the “sure thing principle”, and the “producer’s curse” as examples of
the many decision paradoxes faced by movie makers. In Section 5, I reach some
9
conclusions.
Naturally, this chapter is a somewhat personal view of the business and what
I think is interesting and important about it. Much of the material draws on my
research in many articles and from my book Hollywood Economics: How Extreme
Uncertainty Shapes the Film Industry. This is not a review of research. Rather it is
an exposition of a modeling strategy and a research agenda that I have found to be
productive and informative. In my own work on this industry I have found that all
the complexity of economics can be found there and there is much to explain that
stretches the boundaries of current economic theory.
Much of economics focuses on averages, expectations, and standard deviations.
Economists focus so intently on these measures that they often toss out “outliers”
to eliminate their influence. This might be right for toasters or trousers, but the
movies are not like that. The statistics of the movies are “wild” and utterly non￾Gaussian. The outliers are the main event, not something to be tossed out, and
averages are just numbers signifying nothing. Motion picture revenues are just a
number—pure information—and have no natural scale or limit. Expectations and
higher moments of the distribution need not even exist. One of the key lessons
of trying to do science in such a non-standard industry is that we have to take the
focus away from explaining particular events (why movie A did well and B did
not) to undertanding process and pattern; the ultimate object of a science of the
movies is the probability distribution and the dynamic process that produces it.
2 The Essential Economics of Motion Pictures
This should go quickly as I have already alerted you to many of the key issues. On
the other hand, there are some that have to wait for the graduate version of movie
economics to come later.
10
No Body Knows
I still like the way the fundamental property of the movies was put by a wise Dis￾trict Court Judge (whose smart decision was overturned by the Supreme Court).
Moving picture films are a fluctuating and uncertain product. Until a
film has been exhibited no one knows or can accurately estimate its
value as a box-office attraction, either as a first-run exhibition or a
subsequent run exhibition.5
Economists would put this by saying that movies are experience rather than
inspection goods. You have to see a movie to know if you like it or not. What this
means is that demand is revealed by the audience when the film opens. Audiences
discover what they like, they do not reveal preferences they already have. Once
demand is discovered, supply and pricing must adapt.
Discovering Demand
To get the discovery process underway, films have to be exposed on screens. Through￾out a film’s run, audiences discover and exchange information about movies. Box
office reports are signals to distributors and exhibitors about the audience’s likes
and dislikes.
A studio/distributor can sample this information in a variety of ways through
the design of its release. A wide release on many screens simultaneously gathers a
large sample of information, but leaves few degrees of freedom in responding to it.
It leaves less time for word of mouth and other information to influence viewers.
The film may disappear too quickly for word to spread and for audiences to find
it. In a smaller release on fewer screens, a studio is sampling sequentially through
5United States v. Griffith Amusement Co., 68 F. Supp. 180, 196 ( W. D. Okla. (1946), cited in De
Vany and Eckert (1991).
11
the audience, discovering its demand as information flows over a longer period of
time.
Adapting Supply
Once demand is discovered, prices and supply adapt. There are three prices rele￾vant to a movie: the admission price, the rental rate, and the distribution fee. The
admission price does not vary much, though it may differ among theaters. The
rental rate is highly variable. So is the distribution fee. These will be discussed
below.
The main supply response is in extending the run, keeping the film longer in
theaters. This is particularly true of a wide release. In a smaller release, prints
may be ready or can be made quickly enough to expand the number of theatri￾cal engagements; thus, both the length of the run and the number of theaters can
be changed to respond to demand. The later engagements have the benefit of the
demand information revealed in the earlier bookings, so the sequential sampling,
smaller release reduces risk for the exhibitors who show the film later in the run.
The large, wide release is more risky for exhibitors as they have no prior informa￾tion to go on. The big release is likely to be more risky for the studio too because
the number of prints to be made has to be decided before demand is known and
because supplying more prints means more is spent before demand is known.6
So, demand is discovered and supply adapts, primarily by extending the length
of the run. This goes on in real time using overnight and weekly box office reports.
The decision to extend the run is a matter of contract which is delegated to the indi￾vidual theater under the holdover clause. The holdover clause is a contingent term
of the exhibition license that specifies an amount of box office revenue which, if
equaled or exceeded in the prior week, extends the run another week. The holdover
6A print is a role of film and can cost thousands of dollars. Print and advertising costs are all
expended up front and may be from 25 to 40% of a movie’s costs.
12
amount is unique to each theater and film, negotiated as part of the license. The
clause decentralizes the decision to extend the run because it relies only on local
information of time and place, ie. conditions at the theater where it is running. If
box office revenue exceeds the holdover, the distributor is obligated to leave the
film another week and the theater is obligated to run it another week. There is no
limit to the number of times a film may be held over so a theater might run a movie
for twenty or more weeks if it is grossing well.
Pricing Films
Motion pictures have three different prices. Most people think of the “price” of a
movie as what they pay at the box office. But the price the theater pays for showing
a movie is more important to the motion picture distributor, for this is their primary
source of revenue from the film; this price is the rental rate or percentage of box
office revenues paid to the distributor for the right to exhibit the film. The third
“price” is what the producer of the movie pays to the distributor for placing the film
in theaters and collecting film rentals. These prices are interrelated: the admission
price is the source of box office revenues to the theater which pays a rental rate to
the distributor, who deducts from these rental receipts a distribution fee.
Since demand must be discovered in a way that lets supply and prices adapt,
three problems arise with respect to setting all three prices of the film. First, the
demand signal shouldn’t be noisy. Second, the demand signal should convey in￾formation about demand at the point where price is to be adjusted. Third, prices
should respond in some reasonably optimal way to the demand signal. I have come
over the years to admire the industry’s solution to the film pricing problem.
The admission price is fixed over the duration of the run, with passes and dis￾counts being restricted in the earliest weeks of the run. With a fixed admission
price, any variations in box office revenue are due entirely to the number of ad-
13
missions. The studio, therefore, receives a pure quantity signal of demand, un￾contaminated by variations in the admission price. If a minimum admission price
were not specified, the exhibitor could, literally, cut the price to zero and make it
up on concession sales, particularly for Disney animated movies and movies that
appeal to a young audience. As a protection against this, exhibition licenses prior
to the Paramount decision usually specified either a minimum admission price, or,
deferring to the local knowledge of the exhibitor, specified a “usual, or customary”
price. The courts ruled this practice to be unlawful price fixing and such price
clauses were expunged from exhibition contracts. Virtually all theaters in the post￾Paramount era became first-run theaters, so the almost ancient practice of charging
more for the first than for second and subsequent runs became extinct. So, we find
that admission price does not vary over the course of a motion picture’s run, though
some theaters may charge different prices than others.
The stability of admission price among different movies and over the course of
the run has puzzled economists and observers of the motion picture business. This
is such a durable practice that it must have some enduring properties; if this pricing
arrangement were not maximizing revenue, then it would change, according to
economic principles. But, aside from its historical durability, there are economic
reasons to think the practice is rational.
Consider first how one would decide how to price a studio’s motion pictures.
Would a Warner Brothers movie be priced differently from one produced by Twen￾tieth Century, Paramount or Columbia? Since studios no longer produce a certain
style of motion picture, there is no brand identity for differentiating their products.
At one time, MGM had a brand name and its movies could command a premium
price. But, that era is gone and all the studios produce a wide range of films with no
evident or predictable studio style or genre; nor do they have particular stars under
contract. No studio has a lock on blockbusters and they all make bombs. Moreover,
14
every studio would strongly object to having its movies priced more cheaply than
others; it would be seen as a signal of inferior quality.
But, then why not price the best movies more dearly? If only you knew...
The “nobody knows” principle, developed at some length later, says that you don’t
know which movies will be hits and which will be misses. You only know after a
movie runs that demand is so high that a premium price could be charged. Setting
a higher price before a movie is released gambles with the information dynamics.
Choking off demand early in the run curtails the non-linear building of demand
from week to week. You will see later that hits have distinctly different runs from
conventional movies and they build demand over time. Charging a higher price in
the early weeks of the run may prevent that dynamic from getting off the ground.
A studio really only knows that it has a hit on its hands four or more weeks into
the run, and then it is too late to change the admission price, and illegal for it to
direct the exhibitor to do so. Once it is understood that supply can be expanded in
a perfectly elastic way, then one sees that high demand can be fully captured by
extending the run, without raising the admission price. A side benefit of an inflexi￾ble admission price is that the exhibitor cannot game the rental rate by varying his
admission price.
Now that Paramount’s restrictions have made virtually all theaters first run
theaters, it is no longer possible to price the first run higher than the second and
subsequent runs. Nor is is likely that limiting the film’s initial run to a few theaters
to give them a measure of exclusivity and pricing power would survive a legal
test under Paramount’s holding that excessively wide clearances are unreasonable
restraints.
The simple answer to the question of why do prices not adjust to high demand
is that they do, you just have to look at the prices that really count for the studio
and the producer. The rental price adjusts almost perfectly to demand and the dis-
15
tribution fee does as well. The rental price depends directly on the grosses at each
theater where the film is playing.7 This provision keys the price to local conditions,
because the local rental rate depends wholly on the local theater’s admissions. So,
price is low where local conditions warrant and high otherwise; this gives a close￾to-optimal spatial variation in prices that extracts more revenue from each film.
The solution to the problem of varying the rental price in accordance with
demand is achieved through the contingent pricing clauses of the rental contract.
The exhibition license cleverly specifies a two-part pricing rule that is adaptive
and sufficient to capture most of the value of the film to the exhibitor. Note, this
variable pricing component too is decentralized as the license sets a unique price to
each exhibitor conditional only on her theater’s grosses. The rental is determined
by a formula in the contract. Let us consider the sophisticated pricing instruments
contained in the motion picture rental contract and how the rental price is adjusted
in accordance with demand.
The Rental Contract
First, there is a guarantee or fixed amount which the exhibitor must pay no matter
what the film grosses. This is individually negotiated or, if the distributor awards
licenses by taking bids, it will be part of the exhibitor’s bid. For many films, the
guarantee will be small or zero. For a number of heavily demanded films, it may
be rather high (above $100,000). We know a two-part price is sufficient to capture
all the exhibitor’s surplus; the guarantee is the fixed part of the two-part price.
But, neither the distributor nor the exhibitor knows what the film will gross, so
the guarantee cannot be set optimally in advance. Adjusting price when demand is
revealed is the task left to the variable terms of the rental contract. The rental is a
7At one time there were contracts that called for the theater to pay a rental based on a national
gross rather than the theater’s gross. See the discussion of these “formula deals” in the historical
section below.
16
percentage of the exhibitor’s gross. It is reset each week according to a declining
schedule. The exhibitor pays a minimum percentage of her gross each week, with
the minimum declining over the course of the run. A typical example would be
a four week minimum run (part of the contract) where the minimum percentages
might be 70, 70, 60, 60 with any weeks beyond at the flat rate of 40 or 35 percent.
This declining schedule compensates the exhibitor for the rising probability that
the film will die next week (De Vany and Walls, 1997) as the run progresses.
Pricing Hits
There is more. Suppose the film takes off in its fifth week and begins to gross major
money. By that week, the rental rate is only 35 or 40 percent and the exhibitor is
making a killing. If a film gets “legs” it is likely to occur around the fourth or fifth
week (De Vany and Walls, 2003b). And it may run 20 to 40 weeks if it is a Star
Wars or Forrest Gump. Runaway hits such as these generate the bulk of revenue
and profit, so the studio must extract a high rent from them; otherwise profits will
be left with exhibitors who had nothing to do with producing the hit.
To guard against leaving money in the exhibitor’s hands, the rental contract
contains a rental escalation clause. This is the 90 percent on gross above the house
nut rule: Rent = 0.90 × (Box Office Gross − House Nut). The rent will be the
minimum applicable percent of gross or 90 percent of gross minus the house nut,
whichever is higher. The house nut is a fixed, negotiated amount; years ago, the
house nut was an approximation to the exhibitor’s weekly cost of operating his
theater.
How important is this rental escalation? The sort of data required to answer
this question are private, but I have seen data to indicate that the clause is very
important in pricing breakaway movies. An example is Tootsie’s 23 week run in a
theater. The minimum weekly percentages for the contracted six week minimum
17
run were 70, 70, 60, 60, 50, 50, with holdover weeks at 35 percent. The house nut
was $3,000. The data for this theater show that Tootsie’s effective rental rate was
70 percent the first week. Then it jumped to 90 percent for 10 straight weeks (less
the house nut), dropped to the minimum 35 percent for 5 weeks and then jumped
back in the 16th and 17th weeks to 90 percent after which it ran 5 more weeks at
35 percent.
Overall, Tootsie’s rental rate in this theater was 54.29 percent. Had the 90
percent over the house nut clause not been in the contract, Tootsie would have
earned a rental rate of just 45.78 because it would have run 17 weeks of its 23
week run at 35 percent.
How much did the 90 percent clause add to Tootsie’s rentals? We don’t know
for sure, but we can calculate an illustrative amount from the data for this theater.
Tootsie played on 1222 screens. Its US gross was $177.2 million. Suppose we
take the difference in rental rates for this theater and apply it to Tootsie’s national
total box office revenue. Without the clause, the rental rate of 45.78 percent would
have yielded total rentals of $81.1 million. With the clause, the rental rate of 54.29
percent would have yielded total rentals of $96.1 million, an increase of nearly 19
percent or $15 million.
Lesson learned. Tootsie was the second-highest grossing film of 1982. It ran
23 weeks in the theater for which we have data and longer in other theaters. The
laws of the box office, which shall see later, say that hit movies have long runs and
they dominate total theatrical grosses and rentals. A distributor cannot afford to
underprice the hits or leave them in theaters for long runs at the minimum rental
rate. The 90 percent clause keeps this from happening, even when no one knows
which movies will be hits.
18
Clearances
Distributors must give exhibitors some protection against competition. Otherwise,
exhibitors will be reluctant to screen the movie. In addition, the distributor does not
want the theater’s box office take to be diluted among many theaters for this would
lower rentals and shorten the film’s run for its take would fall below the holdover.
Finally, distributors would be reluctant to have exhibitors competing in admission
price for that would reduce their rentals which, we have seen, depend directly on
box office revenue. The long-standing solution to most of these problems is the
clearance clause of the rental contract.
A clearance is an agreement with the exhibitor that gives him a measure of ex￾clusivity in the showing. The distributor agrees not to license the movie to specif￾ically named competitors of the licensed exhibitor. The clearance is determined
through bid or negotiation. A theater might include the clearance it wants in its
bid. The bid letter might suggest a clearance. Alternatively, the clearance might be
negotiated. Over time, clearances may tend to become more or less customary.
Broad or stable clearances tend to limit competition. For that reason, clear￾ance arrangements are subject to court scrutiny. Granting a theater an exclusive
franchise can be interpreted as a grant of a long-run clearance to the franchised
theater against its competitors. When a distributor owns a theater the effect is to
clear the territory of competing exhibitors. This is a controversial area because the
Supreme Court found clearances that were too wide or routinized to be violations
of the antitrust law.8
The Distribution Fee
This is the third of the prices we are concerned with. Here too, the nobody knows
principle applies: since nobody knows how much a film will gross, it is impossible
8United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc., 334 U.S. 131 (1948).
19
to set an optimal fee for distribution service. The distributor, a studio usually, books
the film with theatrical booking agents, advertises, distributes prints to theaters and
collects them after the showing for distribution to other theaters. Most importantly,
the distributor collects rental payments and monitors exhibitors to verify they are
showing the movies booked and at their proper times and that rental payments are
properly correlated with box office revenues.9
If a movie has a long run, the distributor is continuously performing these
duties over an extended time frame. No one knows how long a movie will run or
what it will gross. So, it is impossible to gauge the distributor’s cost or the value
of the distributor’s productive efforts. That is, until the film has run; after that, all
these things become clear.
The industry’s long-standing solution to these, and other issues, is to charge a
conditional distribution fee that depends on the outcome. The typical arrangement
is a fee around 30%, but the rate is negotiable. This fee not only addresses the
nobody knows problem, it also better aligns the distributor’s interests with those of
the producer, who is really the residual claimant or owner of the movie. A propor￾tional distribution fee gives the distributor an incentive to maximize rentals and,
since rentals are the source of revenue ultimately to the producer, their interests
are made more compatible. If the distributor received a fixed fee, the incentive to
maximize rental collections would be muted.
Because it is a percentage of rentals, the distribution fee varies directly with
movie’s success. So, the key prices are quite flexible and their levels are condi￾tioned on the state of demand as demand is revealed over the course of the run.
9There are detective firms for hire to detect theater cheating because the theater pays rentals
based on what they report their box office revenues to be. There had been in the past a good deal
of underreporting, but this appears to have lessened with modern ticket machines and theater chains
who have long-term relationships to preserve (see De Vany and Eckert 1991).
20
3 A Brief History of Motion Pictures
We have spent some time on the arrangements between distributors and theaters be￾cause they are at the heart of the industry’s problem: how do you discover demand,
adjust supply, and price movies when nobody knows their value? This problem is
as old as the feature motion picture. And the solution to it has not changed much
since the movies began. In fact, many features of the industry today resemble those
at the inception of the industry. It is useful to look back briefly to see how little has
changed, including nearly all the terms of the exhibition license, for it reveals those
features of the industry that are deep and immutable and those that are superficial.
In the 1890s and 1900s, producers sold copies or prints of motion pictures out￾right to theater owners.10 Exhibitors resold their prints when they no longer wished
to show them. By 1903, organized film exchanges supported print trading among
exhibitors and eventually the exchanges became rental agencies to reduce the cost
of transferring prints. Most of these pictures were low-budget one-reelers: 10-
minute comedies, 15-minute dramas, 5-minute scenic films, and 20-minute west￾erns. Four to eight of them comprised the typical two-hour program for which
patrons paid a nickel. By 1911, about 150 exchanges supplied 11,500 theaters with
enough reels to provide almost daily program changes.
Copying and bootlegging were common. The flat price that the producer re￾ceived for selling a print to an exchange did not correlate with the picture’s success
in the market place. Revenues were too small to justify big productions. Releases
had to be changed frequently to stimulate attendance. Without marketing, however,
the public had scant information about which pictures to see. There were no great
stars or studios in this period, and memorable pictures were rare. Exhibitors faced
an unreliable stream of indifferent motion pictures by unrecognized producers and
10In this section I rely on De Vany and Eckert (1991).
21
artists.
The Feature Motion Picture
The multi-reel feature picture, produced as early as 1907, became popular and
widespread by 1913. It fundamentally changed the industry. Producers and ex￾hibitors saw the value in moving from daily program changes to two or three fea￾tures per week. Demand would rise through word-of-mouth advertising, theaters
could become more lavish and charge higher admission prices, and distributors
could choose among better theaters. The major studios, great stars, and memorable
features developed as the industry moved away from one-reelers to feature motion
pictures.
Features cost more to make than one-reelers, so a nationwide distribution sys￾tem was formed to lower the cost of distributing them. Higher cost productions
required larger financial commitments from producers. To finance a picture, a pro￾ducer had to show that a distributor would handle it and exhibitors play it. The
ability to contract “forward” for the distribution and exhibition of a feature be￾fore it was produced was essential to financing. Forward contracting was also the
genesis of vertical integration.
At first producers sold exclusive rights to their productions by territory. These
were called “states’ rights” deals because they encompassed one or more states,
although they were often for only part of a state. Copies of the motion picture were
sold to a states’ rights distributor for a flat fee that was based on the territory’s pop￾ulation. As they gained experience, however, distributors learned that population
was an unreliable estimator of demand and they began to charge a rental fee, or
royalty, that was based on a percentage of the exhibitor’s box office revenue. This
arrangement was also acceptable to the exhibitor since it was less risky than paying
a flat rental for the feature no matter how well it did at the box office. However,
22
for the royalty to correspond with demand, the exhibitor’s box office report had
to be truthful. Anticipating vertical integration, the typical area or states’ rights
distributors were exhibitors who would show the picture in their own theaters, and
then lease it to other exhibitors in the allowed territory for later runs. These later
runs were for designated periods and sometimes were exclusive.
By 1913-14, producers licensed blocks of a full season’s production (perhaps
thirty pictures) to a distributor in a single agreement. Paramount Pictures Corpora￾tion, formed in May 1914 by the merger of five exchanges and regional distributors,
secured the franchise to distribute all the features of three of the leading production
companies. The producers agreed to make a number of features each season for
Paramount to distribute. In return, Paramount agreed to pay the producers 65% of
the gross revenue it received from theater rentals and sub-licensing to other dis￾tributors. Paramount retained 35% as its distribution fee, an arrangement that is
retained to the present day. Paramount guaranteed minimum returns to the produc￾ers and advanced cash to them on each features release date, against which film
rental payments received from exhibitors were credited.
To secure exhibitors for the features they financed, distributors granted fran￾chises to exhibitors. These franchises gradually replaced states’ rights deals. By
taking a distributor’s franchise, an exhibitor agreed to show the distributor’s entire
line of motion pictures. As Cassady (1959) noted, “this early version of block￾booking developed out of the need of distributors for a more efficient method of
selling films.” The franchising exhibitor also bought features “blind,” before they
were seen, or before they had even been made.
The Emergence of Vertical Integration
By 1916, features predominated over short films, and movie “palaces” had been
built. But, producers and distributors wanted stable outlets and exhibitors wanted
23
assured supplies. The contractual arrangements on which they relied were a more
uncertain instrument to that end than vertical integration. Vertical integration of
distribution with exhibition offered outlets for distributors, who could then guar￾antee play time to the producers with whom they contracted. With guaranteed
distribution and exhibition, producers were better able to finance their features.
The impetus for integration came from all links of the production, distribu￾tion, and exhibition chain: distributors merged upstream and downstream; the￾ater chains merged upstream through distribution to production; producers merged
downstream through distribution to exhibition. Paramount the distributor became
a producer and also built theaters. Fox and Loew’s entered production from the
exhibition side of the industry. The producers Warner and Goldwyn formed the￾ater chains and also developed distribution facilities. By 1931, Paramount owned
nearly 1,000 houses and its own studios, and the six largest circuits owned 2,437
theaters (one-eighth of all theaters).11
The driving force behind these changes was the introduction of the high-cost
feature motion picture. Within fifteen years of its introduction, the structure and
controversial practices that the government would later attack had emerged: ex￾clusive territorial licensing, a sequence of runs, block-booking, franchising, price
stipulations, and vertical integration had become the industry norm.
The Paramount Litigation
The five major defendants in United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc.12 were
Loew’s (renamed MGM), Paramount, RKO, Twentieth Century-Fox, and Warner
Brothers. Each of the major studios was vertically integrated from production
through distribution and exhibition. The three minor studio-defendants were not
fully integrated: Columbia and Universal produced and distributed motion pic-
11Conant (1960).
1266 F. Supp. 323 (S.D.N.Y. 1946).
24
tures; United Artists distributed only. The court found that the defendants con￾spired to fix minimum theater admission prices; engaged in intertemporal price
discrimination by charging higher admission prices for first-run than for later show￾ings; conspired to fix patterns of exclusive clearances and runs for neighborhood
theaters; and restrained trade by licensing motion pictures in blocks. It found
that the five major defendants also operated theaters monopolistically through joint
ownership or pools.
In its 1948 Paramount antitrust decision, the Supreme Court relied on sim￾ple measures of box office revenue concentration among the major motion picture
distributors to make its finding that the studios, acting together, monopolized the
market for “first run” motion pictures. The Court’s decision indisputably altered
the studio system, forcing the divestment of studio-owned theaters and altering the
contracts through which motion pictures were licensed to theaters (De Vany and
Eckert, 1991). Unfortunately, the courts got it wrong.
A central piece of evidence the courts relied on to infer market power of the
defendants was the combined market shares.13 It is interesting to note that dur￾ing the half century following the Paramount Consent Decrees, all but one of the
distributors-defendants (RKO, who exited in 1957) continue to survive. The orig￾inal distributors-defendants were Loews, Paramount, RKO, Twentieth Century￾Fox, Warner Brothers, Columbia, Universal and United Artists. Loews and United
Artists are now part of MGM while Columbia is now part of Sony Pictures. The
new entry into this upper echelon is the Disney-owned Buena Vista.
The current market share of the top five distributors (at 72 percent) is simi￾lar to that of the market share of the five major distributors-defendants during the
Paramount litigation (at 73 percent in 1943-44). The current Eight Firm Concentra-
13United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc., 85F. Supp. 881, 894 (S.D.N.Y. 1949). See Conant
(1960) and De Vany and Eckert (1991). During the 1943-1944 season, the eight defendants had
received 95 percent of domestic film rentals (Westerns excluded).
25
tion level at 95 percent is the same as during the period of the litigation.14 So, little
has changed in terms of revenue concentration in the business, a property related
to self-similarity which we discuss in the next section.
Contracts and Practices
The courts challenged five practices of the defendants; each of these practices high￾lights the challenges of discovering demand, adapting supply, pricing movies, and
structuring incentives which remain central issues in today’s motion picture indus￾try. I will briefly discuss each the challenges to show where the court went wrong.
Admission Price Fixing and Price Discrimination The courts found that the
defendant distributors were guilty of price fixing and price discrimination. Admis￾sion price fixing was inferred from the practice of clearing a zone of competing
exhibitions and a clause in the contract that stipulated the exhibitor’s admission
price. Film rentals were then, as well as now, determined by box office receipts.
An exclusive run limits rivalry so that the theater’s profit maximizing price will be
closer to the price that will maximize rentals. The license exploited the exhibitor’s
informational advantage by stipulating that the usual or customary price was to be
the minimum admission price, leaving the exhibitor the (seldom exploited now, but
historically important) option of raising the price for motion pictures the exhibitor
thought would be in high demand.
Intertemporal price discrimination may have been tempting for distributors to
try and there is little to object to about it, since if it increases film rentals it will
expand the supply of motion pictures. But it required information about audience
preferences that could only be learned as the feature played. The best a distribu￾tor seeking to extract additional revenue from a film could do given this imperfect
14Values of CR5 and CR8 for 1943-44 are computed from United States v. Loew’s Inc., 334 U.S.
131. Final Finding of Fact 100, February 8, 1950. See Conant (1960, Table 13, p.46).
26
information would be to put it in a high-priced theater first and allow movie goers
with high preference to “self-select” for that theater. Exclusive, first-run engage￾ments followed by broader release to neighborhood theaters enabled distributors to
create a system of priority among film goers that would extract more film rental if
the film played well. The limited number of prints of a first-run release had to be
rationed sequentially in any event.
Runs and Clearances The District Court and the Supreme Court argued that the
clearances of a competitive system would not be stable and might even change from
one motion picture to the next. But this is not necessarily so. The exhibitors will￾ing to pay the highest royalty on a motion picture may change little from picture to
picture since this depends on the theater’s location, quality, and size which do not
change from picture to picture. The courts also neglected the fact that runs are vari￾able even within a fixed run and clearance system. Pictures that play poorly do not
run the expected length of time and those that are more successful run longer than
expected. The actual run and clearance period depends on how the film performs.
The stability of runs and clearances were reasonable restraints on trade be￾cause they enabled distributors and exhibitors to build trust and reputation. Longer
term relations with first-run exhibitors supported demand-revealing experimenta￾tion and promoted stable expectations of product and play time on both sides. The
exhibitors whose runs followed the riskier first run had more information on which
to base their booking decision and could select films more carefully. Their rewards
were potentially smaller, but so was their risk and the potential gross of their house.
The modern analogue to this practice is following a theatrical run with videos and
TV. The latter are more easily priced because of the information revealed in the
former.
27
Formula Deals, Master Agreements, and Franchises What we now know as
theater chains were at the time called circuits. Some of the most interesting deals
the courts found wanting were designed to address issues involving the theater
circuits that were beginning to become a major force on the exhibitor side of the
industry. They can be seen as precursors to dealing with multiplex theaters and
chains.15
Formula deals determined the rental price of a given feature for the circuit as
a specified percentage of the feature’s national box office gross receipts. All the
circuit’s theaters were included in the deal, and the circuit could allocate playing
time and film rentals among them at its discretion. This flexibility is surely useful
in today’s multiscreened theater environment.
In a formula deal, a circuit paid royalties on the nationwide gross box office
receipts rather than its own. Because the royalty was independent of the pattern of
play chosen by the circuit, it could move a film among its theaters so as to maximize
its earnings. The circuit could not decrease its rental payments by manipulating a
film’s play pattern among its theaters since its film rentals were tied to the national
box office revenues (see De Vany and Eckert, 1991 for a more complete discus￾sion of this exotic deal). A modern theorist would see this clever scheme as an
asymptotically incentive compatible mechanism. Since a circuit’s rentals would be
a negligible portion of a movie’s national gross, there is little to gain from falsely
reporting its theater grosses; truthful revelation is then an asymptotically dominant
strategy. This remarkable device was invented more than 50 years before Groves
(1973) discovered his famous, truth-revealing mechanism and well before the full
theoretical development of incentive-compatible mechanisms. Fact is stranger than
theory.
15De Vany and Eckert (1991) argue that these practices were deemed objectionable because they
were seen as favoring the circuits over the independent exhibitors. Today, even independent ex￾hibitors are best seen as small chains.
28
Master agreements (or “blanket deals”) licensed a feature in more than one
theater (usually a circuit). In an age of multiscreen theaters operated in chains, a
master agreement is simply a license that covers several screens and theaters. This
seems to have an advantage over writing a contract for every screen independently.
An n-screen contract is more efficient than n contracts for the same screens. One
can see that this transactions-saving device presages Coase’s (1937) theory of the
firm. Again, the constraints of solving real problems in the movie business led
to the development of mechanisms which economic theory had not yet imagined.
The theoretical imagination pales in comparison to the “wild” uncertainty and rich
complexity of the motion picture environment. Fact can inform theory in ways that
are hard to imagine (see below my discussion of contracting when “nobody knows
anything”).
Franchises covered all of a distributor’s releases for more than one season. The
Department of Justice has dropped nearly all its objections to franchising and this
practice has recently begun to grow.
“Moveover” clauses allowed a licensee to exhibit a given picture in a second
theater as a continuation of a run in the first theater. This clearly is the precursor
to permitting multiplex theaters the flexibility to move movies among screens in
accordance with demand.
The Legacy of Paramount
The intended beneficiary of Paramount was the independent exhibitor. The in￾dependent exhibitors issued a heavy volume of complaints to the Department of
Justice regarding the defendants and their actions. Independent exhibitors were
highly organized and resolutions adopted at their national meetings were directly
communicated to the Department of Justice. Not only is there evidence that the
Department of Justice heard from the independent exhibitors, but there is evidence
29
that the Department listened to them. Most Department-instigated changes favored
the independent exhibitor over the theater chains and the studios.
Paramount’s remedies did not have their intended effect, however, and they
eventually harmed the independent exhibitor. They promoted wider competition
for film exhibition rights and reduced production, which raised motion picture
rental rates and admission prices. The higher film rental rates lowered exhibitor net
profits. Distributors stiffened the terms of exhibition licenses as the less flexible li￾censes and licensing methods called for by Paramount increased their vulnerability
to the decline of exhibition caused by the increased competition from television.
Perhaps the definitive test of whether Paramount improved the lot of the inde￾pendent exhibitor is to look at their own actions. Just a few years after the studios
sold their theaters, exhibitors, fearing television, called on the Department of Jus￾tice to let the studios reenter exhibition so that they might have stronger incentives
to produce motion pictures. Exhibitors contended that competitive bidding did not
solve any problems and increased film rentals (Federal Trade Commission, 1965).
The methods for allocating motion pictures that were devised in the Paramount
decrees fostered an explosion of exhibitor antitrust cases against the distributors
(Cassady and Cassady, 1974).
The integrated studios—Loews, RKO, Fox, Warner Brothers—lost market value
in the range of from 4 to 12 percent when the Supreme Court handed down its
1948 decision (De Vany and McMillan, 2004). But, Columbia and Universal,
non-theater owning defendants, also lost market value on the order of 7 to 9 per￾cent. This suggests the decision was more far-reaching than merely banning pro￾ducer/distributors from owning theaters; it also barred franchising and other film
licensing practices. These would have been more valuable to the non-integrated
studio/distributors than to the integrated ones for they were the means through
which they maintained vertical controls over theaters.
30
The evidence does not suggest that the District Court’s self-acknowledged “ex￾periment” in altering the long-standing and highly developed structure and prac￾tices in this new information industry was “ruinous.” A fall in value of 5 to 12
percent is damaging, but not ruinous. But, it did not help and, in the opinion of
the stock market, the Court appears to have done harm to the motion picture in￾dustry and the value of its assets. The pattern of harm is broad: the integrated and
non-integrated studios were harmed and so was their major competitor who was
not a defendant. Nor did the litigation seem to end the long-standing hostilities
between the studios and independent exhibitors that had been the source of the lit￾igation. The number of lawsuits brought by exhibitors over distribution practices
grew rapidly after Paramount. Other evidence shows that neither the independent
exhibitors nor the film-going public benefited from the fall in feature film produc￾tion and rise in theater prices and film rental rates that followed Paramount.
Current antitrust decisions and policy with respect to the licensing of films
and ownership of theaters by distributors have implications for what sorts of films
are produced and how they are exhibited. The courts have required films to be
individually licensed, theater by theater, and solely on the merits of the film and
theater. This requirement has stood in the way of ownership, franchising, or other
forms of long-term contracting between exhibitors and distributors. It also has been
interpreted to restrict multiple-picture licensing.
In practice, what this has meant is that it is not possible for a theater to agree
with a distributor to exhibit more than one film at a time. No contracts can be made
for the whole season of a distributor’s releases, nor for any portion of them. This
makes it impossible for a theater to be the outlet for a single distributor such as
Twentieth Century-Fox or New Line Cinema or Buena Vista. Nor is it possible
to license a series of films to theaters as a means of financing their production.
Moreover, the inability to contract for portfolios of motion pictures restricts the
31
means by which distributors, producers and theaters manage risk and uncertainty.
At one time, when the studios owned their own theaters and when they could
contract for many productions with theaters for a period of years, the theaters were
among the primary means of financing production. This was labelled “block book￾ing” and halted by the Paramount Decrees. The licensing and ownership restric￾tions of the Paramount antitrust litigation have made it impossible for exhibitors
to finance the production of motion pictures for release in their theaters. As a re￾sult, motion picture financing falls almost entirely on the distributors who rely on
internally generated funds, the capital market, or presales of distribution rights in
other countries. This, in turn, has probably been a major factor in the emergence
of the concept of a “bankable” star whose participation in a project can assure its
financing because the star will get it on theater screens where it has an opportunity
to earn revenue.
A final irony of the Paramount legacy is that only the original signatories to
the Decrees are bound by its restrictions. This leaves Sony and other new entrants
free to own theaters while Warner Brothers, Paramount, and Twentieth Century
Fox cannot.
4 Graduate Movie Economics: The Stable Paretian Hy￾pothesis
Think about it; motion picture revenues are just information, a pure number that
has no upper bound. Supply can be extended indefinitely and at constant cost.
Consumption does not use up the movie, there is still as much for others to see.
And, consumption may lead to an exchange of information with others, expanding
the class of users. So there is no limit to what a film might earn, nor is there a
natural scale to which revenues converge. Information variables can be magnified
by non-linear feedback and, as a result, they can grow explosively or shrink dis-
32
astrously. Thus, differences among movies can expand exponentially during the
course of their runs and motion picture revenues can “go anywhere.”
The ability of any model to capture these features seems unlikely, but a deeper
look at the nature of the dynamics offers more hope. What we would like to find
is the statistical attractor to which motion picture revenues are drawn. There is
a class of distributions to which motion picture revenues are drawn; it is the sta￾ble class. Stable distributions are the attractors of dynamical processes that retain
a self-similar structure under choice, aggregation, and mixture. The generalized
central limit theorem says that sums of independently distributed random variables
converge in distribution to the class of stable distributions. The normal or Gaus￾sian distribution is stable, but it is the only stable distribution with finite variance.
Other distributions in the stable class are the Pareto, the Cauchy, and the L´evy dis￾tributions some un-named ones (because they do not have closed forms). See the
Appendix for a more detailed discussion of the stable distribution.
A stable distribution S(α, β, γ, δ) is a 4-parameter distribution. Distributions
in the stable class are characterized by their tail weights. If the tail weight, α, is
2, the distribution is Gaussian and the tail decays exponentially. If α is between
0 and 2, then the distribution is some other non-Gaussian member of the stable
class and the tail is said to be “heavy” because it decays at less than exponential
speed. Non-Gaussian stable distributions have Pareto or power law tails and their
tail weight parameter lies in the interval (0 < α < 2). When α < 2, the stable
distributions do not have finite variances. And they may not, for α < 1, have finite
means.
Stable distributions, particularly their Paretian tails, give us the laws of the box
office. Because they are the attractors of dynamics that are stable in form under
choice (maximization), mixture (grouping) and aggregation (adding), they are the
natural candidates for our laws of the box office. Motion picture revenues are the
33
result of choices of individual movie fans, grouping of fans of diverse interests in
theaters, and an adding up of revenues in individual theaters and over many theaters
during the run. Motion picture revenue dynamics, therefore, should converge to
stable distributions, but they needn’t be Gaussian (and are not).
With its characteristic high peak, “heavy” Paretian tails and skew, the stable
distribution is a statistical monstrosity suffering from a condition called leptokur￾tosis. But, leptokurtosis is not something that requires mouth wash or deodorant; it
is a thing of beauty. It is what makes the movies a business of the extraordinary; a
kurtocracy in Nassim Taleb’s (2001) world of randomness. The stable distribution
captures the winner-take-all nature of the movie business as well as the dominant
influence of extreme events. As it is the limiting distribution of recursive, sta￾ble dynamical processes, it is relatively insensitive to initial conditions. But, the
naturalness of these properties is insufficient reason to establish that the stable dis￾tributions are good descriptions of motion picture revenues. They must fit the data.
And they fit like a glove. The stable distributions and the dynamics that produce
them give us the laws of the box office. There is a large and growing literature
on this. To conserve space, I will just note these works here together; they are
Sornette and Zajdenweber (1999), De Vany and Walls (1996, 1999, 2002), Lee
(1998), Walls (1997), Hand (2001), Ghosh (2000), McKenzie (2003), De Vany
(2003a).16
Estimating Stable Paretian Parameters
A brief word about estimating the parameters of stable distributions. Lee (1999)
in his doctoral dissertation covers five techniques for estimating the tail weight
parameter α: the Hill estimator, Nolan’s Stable program, McCulloch’s quantile
16I must mention Art Murphy, a long-time reporter on the business with Variety and The Hollywood
Reporter, who drew log-log plots of movie revenues and frequencies years ago and coined Murphy’s
Law; 20% of movies earn 80% of the grosses. He discovered the Pareto law, though he did not know
it as such, and his law has been pretty durable (a signature of self-similarity).
34
estimator, and two techniques adapted from Mandelbrot’s early research on cotton
future’s prices (Mandelbrot, 1963).
Mandelbrot plotted data to find linear portions in the upper tails of probability
versus magnitude graphs, just as Art Murphy did in the Hollywood Reporter. If
such portions existed, then log linear regressions of log survival probability ver￾sus log revenue could be used to estimate α. The slope of this linear regression
Log(P rob) = Log(constant) − αLog(Revenue) is the estimate.
An alternative method of estimating α is to rank movies according to their
grosses, from high to low. Assign rank 1 to the first, 2 to the second and on down
the line. The ordered revenues are the so-called order statistics. Take the logarithms
of these variables and plot them. The left-hand portion of the graph, corresponding
to the top grossing movies, will be linear and well-fitted by Log(Revenue) =
Log(constant) − βLog(Rank). The inverse of β is an estimate of the tail weight
parameter α.17
Nolan’s Stable program (available at his web site) estimates the parameters of
the stable distribution using maximum likelihood methods. The four parameters
of the stable distribution {α, β, γ, δ} are interpreted as follows: The characteristic
exponent α is a measure of the probability weight in the upper and lower tails
of the distribution; it has a range of 0 < α ≤ 2 and the variance of the stable
distribution is infinite when α < 2. The skewness coefficient β is a measure of
the asymmetry of the distribution; it has a range of −1 ≤ β ≤ 1, where the
sign indicates the direction of skewness. The scale parameter γ must be positive.
It expands or contracts the distribution in a non-linear way around the location
parameter δ which indicates the center of the distribution; the scale parameter is,
roughly, the “width” of the central part of the distribution.
We can illustrate these features of stable distributions in the following figures.
17Essentially, the left hand tail in the order statistics plot is the right hand tail in the frequency plot.
Because the graphs are flipped over, the slopes are the inverses of one another.
35
Figure 1 from De Vany and Walls (2004) shows the stable distribution of motion
picture profit as estimated by Nolan’s Stable program; it also shows a normal dis￾tribution as well as the empirical data. Note how closely the stable distribution fits
the data and how poorly the normal fits. The difference is even greater in the tails,
but the figure cannot reveal this. A look at the upper tail of box office revenue is
shown in a log log plot of box office gross versus rank, where the top grossing film
is rank 1, the next rank 2, and so on. Figure 2 from De Vany and Walls (1999)
illustrates the tail linearity for star and non-star movies. The slope of the regres￾sion of the logarithm of revenue on the logarithm of rank, as stated above, is an
estimate of 1/α. Finally, if the distributions can be shown to be a member of the
stable class, De Vany and Walls (2003a) show that estimates of α can be derived
from the mapping of future on past revenues (see below).
A further issue is the infinite variance. What does this do to regression anal￾ysis of the sort often done of the “determinants” of box office grosses or returns?
The usual regression model assumes a normally distributed error term with finite
variance. But if the variance is infinite, then the conditional expectation of a linear
regression model has no precision — it may be useless or misleading. In their re￾search on stars, De Vany and Walls (1999) use quantile estimators and probability
point estimators instead of the usual linear regression. In recent work, Walls (2003)
uses McCulloch’s (1998) estimator of the stable regression model. He finds that
the distribution of movie returns conditional on its attributes has infinite variance.
In a related paper, he shows that the skew-t distribution is a good approximation
to the more demanding stable distribution. Thus, without tackling the difficulty of
stable regression, researchers can get close approximations to stable results using
the skew-t distribution for the error term.
With this background, we can now turn to the laws of revenue and cost that are
implied by their dynamics and their stable attractors.
36
Laws of the Box Office
There are quite a few findings that have been replicated often enough to assume a
tentative status of a law, at least of a statistical form. They relate to either the dy￾namics or the distribution of box office revenue. I shall be very brief in describing
them since there are detailed descriptions in the literature cited above.
“Winner Takes All” Motion picture box office revenues are highly concentrated
and unevenly distributed. The top 4 movies account for 20% of revenues and the
top eight for nearly 30%. The Gini coefficient is 0.777, indicating a degree of
inequality approaching the distribution of income in Third World countries, and
just 20% of movies earn 80% of revenues.
One of the best measures of inequality is the kurtosis. This is a measure of
departure from the shape of the Gaussian distribution. A leptokurtotic distribution
is sharply peaked, asymmetric and skewed, just the kind of shape that tells us that
movies are very different from one another. In the movies, kurtosis is high. A
Gaussian distribution has a kurtosis of 3; in the movies we find kurtosis values
ranging from 15 to over 100. The kurtosis of box office revenues is 45.
Another measure of inequality is the tail weight coefficient α. Small values of
α are associated with large inequality because such values make extremely large
grosses more likely. Many estimates of α place it in a range of 1.3 to 1.7, with the
most frequent estimate being 1.5. The movies are more unequal than a Gaussian
world would ever be. This vast inequality makes Hollywood a kurtocracy. In
new work De Vany, Taleb, and Spiztnagle (2005) have found that lifetime movie
grosses of actors is so leptokurtotic and “wild” that the mean does not even exist
(α ≃ 0.84 < 1). The kurtosis is on the order of 104, making it clear that the movies
is a kurtocracy ruled by extraordinary artists and events. Yet, even these kurtocrats
experience the “wild” uncertainty and cannot form even an expectation of the box
37
office grosses of their future movies.
Finally, just in case you are an unrepentant Gaussian, you should know that
Forrest Gump had a domestic gross revenue that was 10 standard deviations above
the mean. Titanic was 20 standard deviations above the mean. These events would
never occur in a billion reruns of history in a Gaussian world. The improbable
happens in the movies and these are the main events.
Hits have Long Runs It is impossible to find a movie that grossed $50 million
or $100 million in real terms (relative to 1984 base) that did not have a long run.
Over the past two decades only 5% of movies exceeded $50 million and fewer than
2% exceeded $100 million. A long run does not guarantee big revenues, but hits
always have long runs. That is just what the dynamics of non-linear information
flow would imply and leads to our next law.
Non-linear Information Flow When you consume a movie you leave no less for
others to see. Each viewer adds to the total without taking anything away because
movies are pure information. New viewers are attracted to movies that already have
many viewers; box office reports on the news and word of mouth news convey
messages to prospective viewers proportional to the number who have seen the
film. This non-linear growth rapidly propells film revenues apart from one another.
When large revenues produce large revenue growth, the runs of the largest grossing
films are extended and the result is long-running hits.18
18Readers may see think this information flow is a Gibrat process, but that is not the case. Growth
rates in a pure Gibrat process are proportional to size. A Gibrat growth process predicts a linear
increase of the variance with time; this is not found and the variance increases non-linearly over
time. Second, the standard deviation of the growth rates does not decrease according to S1/2
. A
Gibrat process converges on a log-Normal distribution and this is rejected in the dynamics (they do
not settle down and show longer range correlations).
38
Opening Gross does not Predict Total Gross Suppose a movie dies after its first
week. Its opening week gross would predict its total gross perfectly because they
would be one and the same. On the other hand, opening week gross will not fore￾cast total gross if a movie runs, say, 36 weeks. There is a high but slowly decaying
auto-correlation between weekly revenues, but the correlation between opening
week revenue and revenues in subsequent weeks decays rapidly. By the seventh or
eighth week of the run, there is no correlation between a movie’s opening revenue
and weekly revenues or between its total and opening revenue. Because non-hit
movies have short runs (4 to 6 weeks), their opening revenue is from 60 to 70% of
their total revenue. So, for these movies, there is some correlation between opening
and total revenue and it is stronger for movies whose revenues decay rapidly. Hit
movies move on a different dynamic as we next will show.
Momentum and Chaos De Vany and Walls (2003b) offer an explanation for the
sudden loss of correlation of revenues for hit movies around the fourth to fifth week
of the run and this leads to another law of the box office, the law of momentum and
chaos.
Momentum is a non-linear expansion or contraction of revenues, conditional on
past revenues; the winners separate themselves from the losers. De Vany and Walls
(2003b) show that the expectation of revenues going forward during a movie’s
run can be mapped on past revenues. Under the stable Paretian hypothesis, the
conditional expectation forward revenue on past revenue is E[Ri+|Ri+ ≥ Ri−] =
Ri−α/(α −1), where + means future and − means past. The expectation of future
on past revenues is proportional to past revenue. The mapping is multifractal,
meaning that α changes value during the run (hence violating the Gibrat property).
Though variable, a typical α is about 1.5 which implies that α/(α − 1) is about
39
3.19 This implies that, for a value α = 1.5, a film’s expected future earnings for
its complete run in week i is about three times what it has earned to date. A movie
that has grossed a large amount does not “use up” its revenue; it can continue to
expand its gross. Big films grow faster and small differences between films can
grow explosively. This is momentum.
The non-linearity of momentum opens the possibility of chaos. De Vany and
Walls (2003b) did find evidence of a bifurcation in the mapping of future on past
demand at the fourth or fifth week of the run; at this point hit movies rapidly diverge
from the bombs and the mapping bifurcates into two branches, a hit and a non-hit
branch. Bifurcation is known to be a route to chaos. De Vany and Walls do no
formal tests for chaos because these tests require very long time series and most
films do not run long enough to discern chaos. But, the evidence is there in the
change in the form of the mapping—it becomes expansive for hits and contractive
for bombs—and in the evidence of a rapid separation in the distance (measured
as revenue) between hits and bombs. When two near points are propelled rapidly
away from one another by a non-linear mapping, you have evidence of chaos.
Champions, Births and Deaths Films that attain high rank in the revenue tour￾nament have longer runs than films that attain lesser rank. This and the following
laws are from De Vany and Walls (1997) who model box office revenues as a dy￾namic rank tournament. Champions last longer in rank than contenders do in theirs
and expected duration in rank is declining in rank. This is a law of champions that
seems to hold in sports as well as in the movies.
Seen from another angle, we can say the hazard of death rises during a film’s
run and the hazard is everywhere greater for a film the lower is its revenue rank.
The smaller hazard of successful films in successive weeks of their runs implies
19The value of α can be derived from the regression of the expectation mapping and, thus, is yet
another method for estimating its value (see De Vany and Walls, op cit.)
40
that they should have longer runs. And they do. The expected run life of a film is
longer if, at some time during its run, it attains rank 1 and the higher is the highest
rank it ever achieves during its life.
Another survival statistic that speaks to the unpredictability of films is that the
distributions of deaths and new releases are Poisson. Births and deaths are pure
counting processes and their weekly rates are equal. This implies that the intervals
of time between deaths is exponentially distributed. The exponential distribution is
said to be forgetful because the time to the next death is independent of the length
of the interval.20 So, a film in the n-th week of its run has the same probability of
death as one that just opened (if they are at equal rank). De Vany and Lee (2003)
extend this model by estimating the Markovian transition probabilities between
ranks. A descent in rank is more probable than a rise in rank, and small leaps are
slightly more probable than large ones. Nontheless, a film can transition from low
to high rank—a humble beginning does not prevent a film from becoming a hit.
Extreme Events Dominate The sample average of motion picture revenues is
strongly influenced by extreme events. Dropping just one film, Titanic, from a
sample of 6,289 movies covering twenty years of films released from 1982 through
2001 causes the mean box office revenue to fall by more than a million dollars and
the maximum to fall from $601 million to $431million. This single film accounts
for just under 1% of the cumulative box office revenue of all the movies released
in North America over the past twenty years. In the year it was released, 1997,
Titanic earned 9% of all motion picture box office revenue that year.
The dominance of extreme events is revealed in many ways: by the rightward
skew with the mean far above the mode and reaching the 75th or higher percentile.
20So much for the motion picture release timing game discussed above. If time to death is inde￾pendent of how long a film has been running, there is no way for a studio to predict when to release
its film in order to avoid competition with some other film.
41
Figure 2 reveals the dominance in another way. Revenue declines rapidly with a
decline in rank; a fall from rank 1 to rank 10 produces a change in revenue of nearly
2 orders of magnitude (from a power 10 to 8). The figure also reveals that extreme
events are more dominant for non-star than for star movies (the steeper slope for
non-star movies implies a higher value of the tail weight α. De Vany and Walls
(1999, 2003a) show why this is so: stars increase the least revenue a film might
earn, but do not increase the most it might earn.21
Volatility What follows from the dominance of extreme events is that aggregate
box office revenues are volatile. So are the average and variance of revenues. One
or a few big movies can move aggregate revenues by a lot and this pulls the average
and variance along. When revenues obey a stable Paretian law, increments scale as
(∆t)1/α. Put another way, the phase space is stable-distributed with parameters in
the time space as Sα(|∆t|1/α, 0, 0), where ∆t is the length of the time step.22
Thus, if we observe the box office revenues over a period of 4 years, the
maximum difference among revenues we will likely see in 4 years will be about
42/3 = 5.333 larger than what we would see in 2 years. The largest leap or fall
in revenue from one film to the next that occurs in 4 time years should be about 5
times the change that occurs in 2 years. Thus, we expect quite a bit of volatility
in motion picture revenues when they are stable Paretian distributed. At times the
bottom may appear to fall out and at others it may appear that the industry is on a
rapid expansionary path. But, they are all part of the natural variation and do not
indicate a fundamental change in market conditions or fundamentals. Things just
happen.
21This is confirmed in the stable parameter estimates in Table 1 where the estimate of α is smaller
for non-star than for star movies.
22This relation opens another method of estimating α which has been coded in the DFA (detrended
fluctuation analysis) algorithm by Peng.
42
Self-Similarity Volatility is linked to the statistical self similarity of motion pic￾ture revenues. This appears in many guises, but the operative point is this: a random
variable X(t), t ∈ T is self-similar with index H if for every k > 0 {X(kt), t ∈ T} ≃ {kHX(t), t ∈ T}
where ≃ means equal in distribution. For a stable motion, H = 1/α and since we
know α = 1.5 it follows that H = 2/3. For Brownian motion, H = 1/2. Thus,
movie revenues do not follow a Brownian motion. What follows is that there are
longer-range correlations in motion picture revenues than in a Brownian motion.
This reflects, among other things, the dependence of revenues on extreme events;
such events linger in the data because of the powerful influence they exert on the
statistics.
But, self-similarity may reflect other kinds of scaling beyond time. We shall
see this later, but we can for now imagine that we could restrict movies according
to some observable measure that, in effect, is a rescaling of the variable. What we
should find is that we get back the same probability distribution once we properly
rescale it. Thus, theater screens are another way to rescale revenues and we should
find that a similar distribution holds for screens as for revenues, allowing for the
difference in their magnitudes. And we do find this (De Vany and Lee, 2001).
Alternatively, if we group movies in budget categories, high, medium, low, we
should get back a rescaled distribution of the same probability distribution in each
of these classes. However we proceed to analyze the data, self-similarity suggests
we may find that they are all windows of different scale onto the same underlying
process. We shall encounter self-similarity again.
Non-finite Moments Among the most counterinuitive properties of the stable
distribution is that the variance may be infinite; even more mind-blowing is that the
mean need not exist. All physical processes that can be realized in an observable
43
world have to be finite, at least we feel that ought to be true. How then is it possible
for a probability distribution that actually describes a real phenomenon to have an
infinite variance or, worse, a non-finite mean?
Mathematically, this is not hard. All that is required is that probability in the
outer tails, or upper tail if we are talking about box office revenue because its lower
tail is bounded by zero, decays slowly. A probability distribution can be perfectly
well-behaved and yet decay so slowly in the tail that the integrals of the variance
or mean may not converge. For example, the variance is the expectation of x2
. In
the Paretian upper tail of box office revenue, probability is of the order x−α. Since
α = 1.5, the term in the integral of the variance is, therefore, of the order x2x−1.5.
This goes to infinity as x goes to infinity and, so, the variance does not exist. If
α < 1. the same limit argument holds for the expected value, or mean.
There is nothing hard about that. What is hard is how to interpret a stochastic
process that does not have a variance or may not have an expected value. I see these
properties as a warning that our knowledge is limited and that further observation
of the process will reveal novel outcomes. The process is not changing, but what
it cranks out does change; some changes will appear to be so abrupt that we may
feel that we are observing something entirely new. But, only the outcome of the
process has revealed heretofore unseen events, the process remains stable.
Take the infinite variance. We know that our stochastic process takes leaps and
falls on the order of ∆t1/α. This means that, as time expands, the size of changes
grows. Thus, the largest event so far observed will, eventually, be exceeded. In
fact, the variance will grow as the sample grows. So, the infinite variance is just
a warning that we can never see the full realization of the process which our ob￾servations can only reveal a glimpse of. The Le´vy stable process unveils perpetual
novelty, an attractive feature for a creative process like movie-making.
As to the possible non-existence of the expected value, a similar point is to
44
be made. Now, most motion picture data do tend to have a finite sample mean;
though there are some exceptions, notably market shares of the major distributors.
But, even if the theoretical mean exists (is finite), we expect it to be variable. This
follows from theory, as we know that a linear combination of stable-distributed
random variables will also be stable-distributed, so the mean must be a random
variable and is stable distributed (with suitable rescaling). But, it is the dependence
of the mean on extreme values and the unfolding of the process generating new
extreme values that makes the mean variable.
Aside from cautions against drawing inferences from finite observations of a
process that can “go anywhere”, the infinite variance (and possibly infinite ex￾pected value) has a real advantage. We can forecast outside the sample; the largest
box office revenue that we have so far seen does not put an upper bound on the
possibilities. It would in a stochastic process that makes only finite leaps, for then
the probability of an event larger than the largest event in the sample would be van￾ishingly small. We couldn’t forecast revenue beyond the largest in the sample. Yet,
we know that the probability mass in the upper tail of an infinite variance stable￾distributed variable does not vanish, even for events more than four or five standard
deviations above the mean. If box office revenues were Gaussian, the chances of a
movie reaching Forrest Gump’s or Titanic’s revenues would be zero since the for￾mer is 10 and the latter is 20 standard deviations above the mean! But, box office
is not Gaussian and the stable distribution tells us there are movies yet to be made
that will exceed the largest grosses we have ever seen.
“Nobody Knows” The laws of the box office offer a foundation for Goldman’s
nobody knows anything proposition (Goldman, 1983). Sample averages and vari￾ances are unstable; they change with the sample and the variance grows with the
size of the sample. The expected variance is infinite; the mean or expected value
45
may not exist. The stochastic process unveils perpetual novelty. Leaps and falls
are so large that the business may seem to have entered a new era. Forecasts of
expected values have zero precision. And, yet bigger things lie out there. Put these
together and you will see that nobody on Earth can forecast how much a movie
will gross.
We know this has to be true anyway. If box office grosses could be forecast,
then making movies would be easy. It is not and it should not be. The nobody
knows principle elevates the creative process to the center of the motion picture
universe. Nobody knows because movies are one-off, creative products, each one
unique unto itself. And, they each play out their lives on the screens in equally
unique ways. There is a hint of chaos in the dynamics which are richly complex
and non-linear.
One suspects that Broadway shows, pharmaceuticals, patent royalties, records,
books, and many other creative products share this property. It would be instructive
to explore these industries using the models and tools that have proven so useful in
motion pictures.
Laws of Production and Cost
Hollywood has its laws of production and cost, but I would not dream of writing
down production or cost functions and estimating them. I would not know how to
measure the output or the inputs. That is because movies are unique. And, they are
produced in fairly unique ways. When a movie gets produced it is by a temporary
assemblage of individuals, a temporary team. The producer puts the team together
to make a movie and then the team members go back into the labor pool to wait
for their next project. The movie can be storyboarded, scene by scene, and the
requirements and shooting time can be estimated for each of them. But, shooting
time does not translate linearly into frames and scenes of a finished picture. Linear
46
feet of film do not add up to make a movie.
Sequential Production Producing a movie is a drawn-out process that unfolds
in fits and starts over time. It is a recursive process with complex linkages among
stages and this point of view is born out, not only by tales told by filmmakers
such as Steven Bach (1986) or Mark Litwak (1986), but in the behavior of cost, as
you will see. I will describe the stable law of production which says that a movie
gets no closer to being finished as work progresses. This odd law of production is
revealed in the behavior of expected cost in what I call the angel’s nightmare which
says that the expected cost of finishing a movie is proportional to what has already
been spent.
Production Problems What I first wish to emphasize are the many problems
that arise from the way films are produced and how they are dealt with to varying
degrees of success. These problems make the transformation of inputs into out￾put uncertain; hence the difficulty of writing down a function that represents that
transformation. Broadly, there are hold up problems, sunk costs, and principal￾agent problems among the many creative inputs and financial interests. And, they
are solved in the usual ways, by crafting clever contracts and contingent payment
schemes, by reputation, by careful monitoring, and by ultimatum.
A movie goes through many stages: the development stage where the story is
crafted and tentative casting and financing are explored, to pre-production where
the creative elements are cast and contracted and financing and distribution ar￾rangements are made, to production where the scenes that make up the movie are
shot, to post-production where editing and reshooting are done, to its eventual re￾lease. Money is spent at each stage so if the process fails to advance to the next
stage, that money is spent to no effect. It is sunk and not recoverable. The hard
lesson is that unless a film is finished and playing on theater screens, none of the
47
money expended on it can be recovered. All the money spent on a movie is sunk
at the time it is released.
End Stage Naturally, this end of stage problem presents difficulties. A distrib￾utor might decide to renege on a distribution deal and leave the producer with all
those sunk costs. At that point, unless there is competition for the film, the dis￾tributor might pick it up at a fraction of the cost knowing the producer has sunk
his costs and has to sell the film to recover them. This end of stage problem was
one of the reasons producers and distributors merged to form the studio system
that governed production in the movies from about 1915 to around 1950. Now,
it is settled by contract under which the distributor acquires an equity interest in
the film. The distributor advances at least part of the production cost of the film
in exchange for an interest in it along with the right and obligation to distribute it.
With this arrangement, producer and distributor have a mutual interest in seeing the
film finished and distributed and the end-stage problem is solved. We know that
solving the end stage problem is crucial for, if the end stage cannot successfully be
completed, then each preceding stage will come undone and the film will unravel
from the end to the beginning and the movie won’t get made.
Hold Ups Another stage problem is the potential hold-up that any creative ele￾ment can expose the whole production to. If an actor or director decides to change
the terms of their deal or insist on some change in the story or role or location
or what have you, they threaten the whole project and may render sunk and non￾recoverable everything that has been spent up to that point. It is very hard to fire
an actor or director or cinematographer after scenes have been shot and are in the
can. If they have tantrums or refuse to follow direction or conform to any of the
many details that have been laid out in the story board or script, the project is in
trouble. These days, when a studio only makes from five to a dozen movies, one
48
movie can bankrupt a studio if it fails to be finished or runs far over budget (or is
just expensive and lousy). Tantrums, creative conflicts, a script that falls apart as
it is shot, bad weather, or a mechanical shark that breaks under the stress of being
towed at high speed in the ocean, and a thousand other things can bring a movie’s
production to a halt.
Solutions So, these sorts of problems must be dealt with carefully and creatively
and they are among the many sources of what appear to be strange business prac￾tices in the movie business. First, we know that reputation can make people act
more responsibly and to more diligently pursue the common goal of all the agents
involved in making a good movie that comes in on budget. Reputation is one solu￾tion. Hollywood may have the most carefully adjudicated system of reputation of
any industry. You are in Hollywood what your screen credits say you are. They are
out there for everyone to see. So are the box office statistics. Hollywood’s many
guilds carefully parcel out screen credits and they have developed detailed criteria
for awarding director, screenwriter or producer credits.
Repeat dealing amplifies the effect of reputation. People who have worked
together before tend to do so again, if their collaboration was a good one. One can
trace networks of contacts, as in the Six Degrees of Kevin Bacon game played by
devotees of the Internet Movie Data Base, and they are densely wired with a few
key people at central nodes. Opportunities flow over this network and the structure
of this network is the key to understanding patterns of work and productivity. The
network structure of work and opportunity is known to be Pareto-distributed; a
few central nodes have dense contacts while most nodes have few. This is another
example of self-similarity in the movies; the contact network is Pareto-wired just
as box office revenue is Pareto-distributed.
49
Contracts and Roles Another method of reconciling the creative types and the
money people is to write contracts or organize roles suitably. Thus, a director
can be punished for going over budget; just reduce her fees in proportion to the
amount the production is over budget. This is a common contractual remedy. An
alternative is to blur the line between art and money by having talent participate in
the profit a movie earns. Actors, directors, or screen writers can get a piece of the
action, blunting their willingness to act contrary to the project’s economic interest.
Some directors or actors assume the role of producer, thus merging the creative
and money roles. Similarly, an actor or director who has agreed to make a movie
must have assurances that the project will move ahead to production; his or her
participation may be important to getting financing if the talent is “bankable.” So,
there is a drop dead date at which the producer must be prepared to “pay or play.”
If production does not commence by that date, the producer must pay the artist a
fee.
Monitoring the artists is second nature to the money people in Hollywood. The
story board tells scene by scene how the movie should progress and this progress is
constantly monitored by the producer and a representative of the financial people.
They watch the dailies, the film shot each day, and compare the dailies with the
story board. If the shooting falls behind schedule, this is noticed and a work￾around is discussed. If the dailies show too many reshoots another discussion takes
place. And so on.
Final Authority At some point, there must be a decision with whom to vest
the authority to decide each problem that comes up. This is another place where
reputation and authority crop up. No contract can contemplate all the contingencies
that will arise or who should decide when there is disagreement. But, someone
must decide when there are opposing views. Who should it be? It is here that
50
contracts can become arcane and inscrutable to an outsider. It is in the best interests
of all concerned to place the residual authority in the hands of the person best suited
to choose the best action. But, this will differ; sometimes the director is the best
one to decide, at other times it is the producer. A sloppy deal memo that vests all
residual authority in a director may put the production in the hands of a mad genius
and break the studio. If it puts creative authority in the hands of a money person,
the cast may walk off.
Ultimately, someone must make the hard decisions that may be required to rein
in a runaway production. The stage game is turned into an ultimatum game. That is
the role of the completion guarantee, a bonding company that puts up the money to
finish the movie. When a movie reaches this stage, the game is up and a third party
steps in to make the final decisions. They may not be the best creative choices,
but at least the movie will be completed, salvaging some of the costs now long
sunk. The only hope of recouping these costs is to finish the movie, which the ones
in charge have shown themselves to be incapable of doing. So, the completion
guarantor steps in and finishes the job.
Stable Paretian Costs Having described the tangible possibilities that a movie
might go over budget or that budgets might be uncertain, a natural question is: How
predictable are production budgets? There are many stories about movies famously
over budget; Cleopatra, Heaven’s Gate, and Titanic are examples that readily come
to mind. We are asking what the probability distribution of motion picture produc￾tion budgets is. There is a problem in finding the answer to this question. We have
production budgets for most movies that are produced and released. But, we don’t
have data on whether they are on- or over-budget. The best we can do is to estimate
the distribution of production budgets, as reported by third party sources, to get a
picture of the variety and possibilities. The production budget data will include
51
movies that are over and on budget, giving us some idea of the possibilities.
In two papers, De Vany and Walls (2002, 2003c) examine the distribution of
production budgets. They find that budgets are Pareto-distributed, though they are
less skewed than revenues. Mean budget is at the 62nd percentile and its standard
deviation is approximately equal to the mean.
De Vany and Walls (2003c) estimate the general stable parameter parameter
values of the profit distribution. The lower tail of the profit distribution is Pare￾tian with a tail exponent of α = −2.64. Because the estimated value of the tail
coefficient exceeds 2, budgets have a finite variance. The lower tail of the profit
distribution is dominated by cost and so this is a reasonable estimate of the tail
weight of the cost distribution. In another paper, De Vany and Walls (2002) esti￾mate the tail coefficient and test the Pareto distribution as a model of the cost data.
It turns out to be is a very good model of the budget data. Interestingly, they find
that the budgets of R-rated movies have heavier tails than do the distributions of the
other ratings and, thus, have a higher probability of large budgets. G-rated movies
have the least heavy tails, the inference being that they have a lower probability of
reaching very large expenditure values.
Returns on Budgets What does a higher budget buy? De Vany and Walls (2003a)
estimate returns to production budgets. The elasticity of mean box-office gross rev￾enue with respect to production budget is 0.54. Larger than zero, but it does show
that you cannot buy box office revenue by throwing production dollars at a movie.
You only get back fifty cents on the dollar. Hence, there are decreasing returns to
production budgets with respect to the box office take.
The elasticity of opening box office revenue, the lowest decile, with respect
to production budget is a bit higher at 0.636, but it still is not a good return. Ten
percent more budget buys just six percent more opening revenue. Higher deciles
52
show slightly lower budget elasticities: 0.56 for the median, 0.52 for the upper
quartile, and just 0.44 for the top decile. To explain it in plainer terms, the top
decile is the amount ninety percent of movies will fail to earn and only ten percent
will equal or exceed. The estimates say you move this upper decile by just forty
cents when you spend another dollar on production. Thus, you have increased
the revenue by forty cents of an event that has a probability of just ten percent of
occurring. You could say the expected value of the best that can happen is just four
cents. Not a very good return for a dollar investment.
The Angel’s Nightmare An “angel” in Hollywood or on Broadway is an in￾vestor who agrees to finance a production.23 Having found budgets to be Pareto￾distributed, we are in a position to see what sort of a nightmare is in store for an
angel when a production goes over budget. The angel’s nightmare is tied to the
conditional expectation of the Pareto-distributed budget. The Pareto distribution
has a counter-intuitive conditional expectation: the expected budget, given that y0
has been spent, is y0 (αα−1) . Substituting α = 2.64 the expected budget, conditional
on y0 having been spent, is y0 × 1.609. Suppose $20 million has been spent on
a movie budgeted to cost $16 million. What is the expected cost now that it is
already $4 million over budget? It is 20 × 1.609 or $32 million. The movie is over
the budget and there is no end in sight. This is the angel’s nightmare. It arises from
the peculiar property of the conditional expectation of a Pareto-distributed random
variable; the conditional expectation is linear in the value of the conditioning event.
A Strange Law of Production We can infer something of the production process
from the behavior of budgets. Time is money and we can invert the budget to
obtain production time. This gives us a rather strange law of production. It is
that the expected time to completion of a movie in production for t time periods
23This is drawn from De Vany and Walls (2004).
53
is t × 1.609. The time it will take to finish the project is proportional to how long
the movie has been in production. This means that there really is no end in sight,
which is why production schedules and completion guarantees are so important in
the movie business.
Artist Productivity The first thing one should know about productivity is that
artists can differ in the extreme in productivity. The movies is not like washing
dishes where two people cannot differ by much. Actors and directors, the two cre￾ative productive factors we will focus on, can differ enormously in their produc￾tivity, as we shall see. This is natural for several reasons. First, non-linearity can
magnify small differences in talent or luck into extreme differences in box office
revenues. Second, work opportunities flow over a non-linear network and densely
connected artists—made so because they act or direct hit movies—get most of the
opportunities and work. Third, the most successful artists tend to have long careers.
These facts are implied by the high kurtosis of the stable Paretian distribution that
describes the laws of production.
In spite of Rosen’s (1981) explanation of superstardom, there is not much em￾pirical evidence about it. According to his model, small differences in talent trans￾late into large differences in income. Hamlen (1994) presents evidence from pop￾ular music regarding the distribution of hits. Chung and Cox (1994) show that the
Yule distribution is a good model of hit movies of the top stars. The Yule distri￾bution is a power law distribution with α = 1, so their model is a variant of the
stable Paretian model. Interestingly, in their model differences in success are due
wholly to chance and talent need not be invoked to explain the variation in artist
productivity. Ravid (1999) and De Vany and Walls (1999) examine the influence
of stars on profits or revenues and find they are weak.
To shed more light on the productivity of artists, De Vany (2003a, 2003b) ex-
54
amined the productivity of directors and actors. Unsurprisingly, there is a high
degree of self-similarity of the laws of productivity and the laws of the box office
already presented. The distributions of the number of movies made by actors or by
directors are leptokurtotic; kurtosis is 16 and 22 respectively.
Most actors or directors make just one movie: the mode of both distributions
is one, the mean of both distributions is 2 and is located at the 75-th percentile of
each distribution. If we take box office revenue as a measure of productivity, things
become a bit more wild. The mean cumulative gross of actors is $32.6 million and
the kurtosis is a breath-taking 104. The median is just $1.01 million and the mean
is up at the 85th percentile. In keeping with the dominance of extreme events, De
Vany (2003a, 2003b) finds that the mean portion of cumulative gross due to just
one picture is 22% for actors and 32% for directors.
The stable Paretian distribution fits the production data well and estimates of
α values are 1.5 for directors and 1.8 for actors. The form, fit, and values of the
tail coefficient follow the stable Paretian property of self-similarity. We know that
α = 1.5 for box office revenues; to find a similar value for actor and director
productivity tells us that their productivity is statistically similar to box office rev￾enues. In other words, the distribution of the number of films artists make is just
another view of the distribution of box office revenues. In keeping with Chung and
Cox (1994), it turns out that talent is hard to separate from luck when it comes to
how many movies directors make. De Vany (2003a, 2003b) shows that it is only
among the most productive directors that one finds a significant role for talent over
luck in the odds ratios.
Laws of Profit
“Upfront and sunk” is the rule for costs. The rule for profits might be “way af￾ter and maybe.” You have to wait a long time for profits to accrue and it might
55
never happen. Movies do lose money, most of them. Revenue streams in over a
fairly long time period as a film makes its way through its many venues, domestic
theaters, foreign markets, videos, television and so on.
And then there are portfolios to consider. Studios produce portfolios of films,
most of which lose money and they have to pool profit over all the films in the
portfolio. This is the so-called studio accounting problem. But, it isn’t trickery to
allocate all the cost of the portfolio against all the revenue and then find that a few
movies took in most of the revenue. The producer of a hit may cry “foul” but this
is the way the studio has to be to manage the huge risks it is up against. All this
makes accounting separately for film profits problematic. And, on top of this, is
the fact that these figures are not made public. So, one approaches the subject of
film profitability with a lot of trepidation and caution.
But, economists want to know and there are ways to at least approximate film
profitability in ways that get at the object of our interest; the probability distribu￾tion. If it is stable Paretian, we are in luck (it is), because bias will not change
the form of the distribution, only its scale. So, our probabilistic inferences will
not be that far off. Another way to get at this is to look at returns which can be
approximated by the ratio of revenue to cost.
Dominance of Extreme Events Our first clue that profit is stable Paretian dis￾tributed is in the dominance we find of extreme events. Seventy-eight percent of
movies lose money and 35% of profitable movies earn 80% of total profit. Losses
are more evenly distributed, after all they are not subject to the non-linear informa￾tion flow like revenues, and are generally finite; you can only lose what you spend.
Fifty percent of the unprofitable movies accounted for 80% of total losses. Just
6.3% of movies earned 80% of profits earned in Hollywood over the past decade.
Profits are skewed (but in surprising ways we shall see later) and the kurtosis is
56
large, 15 for all movies in the sample, 23 for movies that do not feature a star,
and a mere 5.6 for movies with stars. The mean profit is negative in each of these
categories. Finally, the impact of extreme events is clearly evident in the stunning
changes that occur over time in the running cumulative average profit shown in
Figure 3 taken from De Vany and Walls (2003c). The rugged, fractal appearance
of the graph is testimony to the impact of extreme events on the running average
and of the stable law of motion of profit.
Stable Profit Laws Having mentioned the stable law of motion, we should now
consider the evidence that profit is a stable distributed random variable. There is no
doubt profit is random, as we have seen, so how can we say it is stable-distributed?
Because the stable distribution fits motion picture profit like a glove and other
distributions, like the Gaussian, can be rejected with high confidence. De Vany and
Walls (2003c) use John Nolan’s Stable program to estimate the four parameters of
the general stable distribution Sα(α, δ, γ, β); I reproduce their results in Table 1.
Note that the Normal distribution, which requires tail index α = 2 and skew￾ness β = 0, does not fit as well (by the Log-Likelihood statistic) and normality can
be directly rejected by tests. The distribution is not symmetric either, as the best
fitting distribution is the general stable distribution with positive skew for movies
featuring stars and negative for others. Only positive skew can be accepted with
high confidence for star movies; the negative skew of non-star movies and of all
movies are not significant. Notice that the locations of the distributions, given by
δ, roughly corresponding to the mean, differ; the stable distributions place more
probability mass on larger losses than the Gaussian.
The scale parameter, γ, represents the width of the central part of the distribu￾tion. In all cases, this region is narrower than a Gaussian distribution. This reflects
the greater weight in the tails of the stable distribution relative to the Gaussian;
57
Table 1: Maximum Likelihood Parameter Estimates
Index Location Scale Skewness Log-Likelihood
α δ γ β
ALL MOVIES
Normal 2 −3.351 8.442 0 −7855.37
symmetric α-stable 1.268 −4.079 4.032 0 −7279.87
α-stable 1.259 −4.042 4.020 0.043 −7279.46
MOVIES WITH STARS
Normal 2 −2.083 14.186 0 −1439.69
symmetric α-stable 1.582 −4.568 10.555 0 −1419.16
α-stable 1.624 −6.385 10.805 0.768 −1410.82
MOVIES WITHOUT STARS
Normal 2 −3.595 6.789 0 −6216.46
symmetric α-stable 1.358 −3.932 3.507 0 −5739.47
α-stable 1.335 −3.827 3.441 −0.122 −5737.95
the lesson is that the location statistic is a brittle estimate of the mean because
probability mass spills away from that area, flowing rapidly into the tails; this is
kurtosis—a sharp peak with heavy tails.
The prime parameter is α, the tail weight coefficient that measures the proba￾bility mass that lies in the tails. α is between 1 and 2, so the expected value of profit
exists, but the variance is infinite. α is well below 2, the tail weight of a Gaussian
tail; this is the sense of saying the stable distribution has heavy tails—its probabil￾ity mass decays more slowly than a Gaussian rate, 1.26 for all movies rather than
2. The star distribution is asymmetric, with a heavier upper than lower tail (this
leads to the curse of the superstar, discussed below). The non-star distribution is
symmetric.
Returns Returns are a bit less difficult to measure than profit. One measure of
motion picture returns is given by the ratio of box office revenue to production
58
cost. These figures omit certain details, like rentals and print and advertising cost,
but they are readily measured and non-controversial. Given reasonable proportion￾ality of these measures, which are partly assured by the way the rental rate and
distribution fees are determined, this ratio mimics returns.
Using the self-similarity argument, our expectation is that the ratio of revenue
to cost is a Pareto-distributed random variable, at least asymptotically in the tails.
The mean return is 0.069 and the standard deviation is a large 6, evidence of a
dependence on extreme events. Further evidence is that the mean is well above the
75-th percentile. Kurtosis is a monstrous 940, very far from a Gaussian kurtosis of
3.
Taking a lower bound on returns of 2, to move into the tail of the return distri￾bution, De Vany and Walls (2000) estimate the tail exponent α for G-rated movies
at 1.35, PG at 1.56, PG-13 at 1.78 and R at 1.48. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
accepts the hypothesis that the data follow a Pareto distribution in this upper tail
where returns exceed 2. Returns have finite expected values and infinite variance.
The authors go on to show that G-rated movies stochastically dominate other rat￾ings in returns and that, with respect to profit, movies in every rating category
stochastically dominate R-rated movies.
Stochastic Market Structure
We have already seen that motion picture revenues are unequal in the extreme.
What about the market shares of firms? De Vany and Walls (1997) show that in￾equality among motion picture distributors exceeds the inequality of revenues. De
Vany and Lee (2003) show that the concept of stochastic market structure is rele￾vant to this industry because shares are extremely volatile. They conclude that the
motion picture industry is stochastically concentrated, but enormously competitive.
Market shares are driven by successful movies and follow a stochastic Pareto
59
motion with α = 1.3. When market structure is stochastic, a stationary measure
of concentration, such as the Hershman-Herfindahl Index (HHI) is a misleading
index of competitiveness. One must use a stochastic measure. One such measure
is the expected value of the HHI. De Vany and Lee (2003) show that the expected
value of the HHI is the second moment (variance) of market shares. Because shares
are Pareto-distributed with tail index less than 2, the HHI does not exist (because
the variance is infinite). The movies are so competitive that this vaunted (and much
over-rated) measure of competitiveness does not exist; the measure has no measure.
Pricing Talent
If you really don’t know anything, you should wait until you do know. This prin￾ciple applies to determining the rental rate, as we have seen. The question now is
how to price talent when you don’t know how much a movie will make. The same
principle, the option principle of delaying the decision until you have more infor￾mation, applies. But, it only applies to the most expensive talent. There we find
that prices are determined through contingent clauses in the contract that trigger
adjustments to the artist’s price if the movie does well. This is called a partici￾pation contract in Hollywood, meaning that the artist participates in the movie’s
profit or revenue. We already know that the studio portfolio problem makes indi￾vidual motion picture profit somewhat arbitrary (economics says the allocation of
joint costs is arbitrary). Revenue is separable from other movies in the portfolio,
so participation contracts more often are contingent on revenue rather than profit.
Extreme Events and Contracting in the Tail The stable Paretian hypothesis
says that extreme events dominate, which implies that compensation should be
conditioned on extreme events because that is where the real action is. De Vany
and Walls (2003c) call this contracting in the tails because the extreme events are
60
located in the upper tail of the revenue distribution, where it is Paretian. Mark We￾instein (1998) studied the evolution of profit-sharing contracts. Darlene Chisholm
(1997) employs a sample of contracts to show that contingent compensation is
given only to established actors. In her 1995 study, she analyzes actor incentives
in share contracts and looks at degrees of residual claims (“points” in Hollywood)
in her 1996 paper. De Vany (2003), similarly, makes the same point about direc￾tors. Using a sample of contracts of established directors, he shows that there are
break points where the percentage of gross distributor revenues paid escalates as
revenues rise. He then shows that the Gaussian probabilities of these break point
events is essentially zero, but significant under the Pareto distribution that actually
fits the data. Conclusion: the parties seem to sense they are contracting in a stable
Paretian, non-Gaussian world.
Taking this point a bit further, the contracts condition on such extreme events
that there can be only a modest incentive effect here. De Vany (2003, 2004) argues
that the participation contract is a dynamic decision rule that pays the conditional
expectation of future revenue at discrete breakpoints along the realized revenue
stream. The contract pays when you do know and its escalating terms reflect the
Pareto property of a rising conditional expectation of future revenues as revenues
accumulate.
A related important finding is that total director pay is dominated by contin￾gent compensation and that the latter is dominated by one or two movies. De Vany
(2003, 2004) shows self-similarity of the revenue and compensation probability
distributions for these major directors; they both are Pareto-distributed and have
equal tail weights of 1.5. Director careers share the same statistics. Director ca￾reers, productivity, pay, and the revenues of their movies all are windows onto the
same underlying fundamental process, one that is dominated by extreme events.
61
Stars, Profits and the Curse of the Superstar There are difficulties in pricing
superstars, particularly if they command a fixed, upfront fee. De Vany and Walls
(2003c) call it the curse of the superstar. It too, contributes to a preference for
paying superstars through participation deals, as shown above.
The curse of the superstar arises because the general stable distribution of prof￾its of superstar movies is skewed and asymmetric; it has a heavier upper than lower
tail (recall our discussion of the profit distribution above). This causes the expected
profit, $7.68 million, of superstar movies to be larger than the most likely profit,
-$7.50 million. You can see what would happen if the star’s agent extracts the ex￾pected profit as the star’s fee. The movie almost surely would lose money. Why? A
single movie is a small sample (of one). In small samples, the most probable event
dominates and the expectation, being a large sample statistic, is improbable. Cal￾culations show that the probability of a loss is 0.80 if the star is paid the expected
profit of her movie. This may explain why Ravid (1999) finds that star movies are
not more profitable. The curse is another good reason to pay stars contingent rather
than fixed fees.
Bidding Wars and the Producer’s Curse There is another reason for producers
to be cautious in bidding for stars. There are about 33 big budget movies produced
each year. If each of their producers tries to hire an established star, a currently
active actor who has three hits in his or her filmography, there will be 33 producers
chasing 18 actors. Each producer places a value on each star, known only to the
producer. The producer who outbids everyone had the highest value among the 33
producers bidding. That means that 32 producers had lower values, evidence that
the winning producer bid too much. This is the producer’s curse. It is known as the
winner’s curse in private value auctions; when you win against many other bidders
bidding personal values, which are unknown to you, you have a lot of evidence
62
stacked up against you that your value was too high. Rational bidding requires
that you shade your bid downward when you bid against a large number of other
bidders.
Is an Actor Really Worth $20 million? When you combine the superstar curse
and the producer’s curse with the evidence that star movies are not more profitable,
you begin to see that an actor might not really be worth $20 million. But, they
will get it anyway if Hollywood fails to guard against these curses. Contingent
compensation is one way to avoid these hazards. In the Epilogue to his book,
Hollywood Economics (2003), De Vany shows that the sure thing principle adds
another layer of complexity to the problem for it leads producers to overvalue the
prospects of known entities relative to lesser known ones because the latter have
more ambiguous probability distributions.
Decisions: Greenlighting, Bias, and Sure Things
There is more to tell, now that we have opened the Pandora Box of decision prob￾lems in movie making. I shall be brief because we have set out the model in enough
detail to see the issues. Hollywood’s decision problems stem from the counterintu￾itive properties of the stable probabilities and the need to treat movies as prospects,
probability distributions, not sure things. Of course, executives share our human
failings too, and known biases in human decision making must share the blame.
Ratings and Genre Ratings and genre predict almost nothing. The odds do dif￾fer among films rated differently, but only fairly sophisticated tools can detect this.
An R-rating does narrow the audience some, but even among a smaller group of po￾tential viewers, revenue is essentially unlimited. Self-similarity reminds us that all
these categories have the same Paretian probability distribution. And, it is stochas￾tic anyway, so there is no way to predict a movie’s outcome knowing its rating or
63
genre. Genre is a particularly weak predictor.
Aggregation Bias Aggregates of variables share the same probability distribu￾tion as the variables themselves, the essential property of stable distributed random
variables. So, the aggregate returns or revenues of a collection of small budget
movies have the same odds or expectations as one large movie whose budget is the
sum of the small movie budgets. But, it is much harder to get a studio to finance
several small movies than to get one large one for the same money. Why is this so?
It is aggregation bias.
Humans are prone to aggregation bias, but the stable probabilities in the movies
compound the difficulties. I think this is because it is difficult to see that the odds
that the sum of random variables will be equal to some amount are no different from
the odds that a random variable will be equal to that sum. The odds of making two
movies whose revenues sum to $100 million are the same as the odds of making
one movie that grosses $100 million. Most people would see the former event as
less likely than the latter. This is an aggregation bias, but it is only a bias because
movie grosses are stable-distributed, which makes the odds of these two events the
same.24
Ambiguous Probabilities and Sure Things Another source of difficulties oc￾curs when probabilities are ambiguous. They always are in the movies, but here is
the issue. An executive must always make some assessment of the odds in choos￾ing movies. This is harder to do when the movie or the actors or producers are
unknown entities. A known entity gives more assurance that the odds can be esti￾mated. At least there is some experience to rely on in estimating the probabilities
so they seem to be less ambiguous and the known entity is more likely to be chosen.
24See the Appendix.
64
But, what is the meaning of ambiguity when we have distributions with infinite
variance and where the mean depends so heavily on extreme events in the upper
tail? Since movie outcomes are so scattered over the whole space of possibilities,
there is no typical movie or representative type. If the studio were to treat both
prospects as having Pareto distributions, then more ambiguous probabilities of the
lesser known entity would be captured by the spread between the least outcome
and the best outcome. Pareto distributions reach an upper value of infinity, no mat￾ter what parameter values they have. So one Pareto distribution can only be more
diffuse than another if it has a lower minimum value. This argument would suggest
that ambiguous probability distributions might be evaluated as having worse worst
outcomes (lower lower bounds in the support of the distribution). It is surely easier
for an executive to conjecture as the worst outcome than to estimate the parame￾ters of the Pareto distributions and they are likely to be unduly pessimistic when
unknown artists are involved. This is where good statistical modeling might make
a big difference in the quality of decisions.
Inside and Outside Odds These decision paradoxes suggest that good statistical
modeling might improve Hollywood’s decision making. I think all I have said
in this review of research points to a conclusion that Hollywood should compare
the inside against the outside odds when they choose movies. Outside odds are
objective odds given by careful statistical modelling of the data. Inside odds are
part of the arguments, stories, and forecasts that people tell each other in meetings
when they choose the studio’s production slate. Overly optimistic forecasts, known
artists, big projects, and “sure things” tend to carry the argument in this setting,
even when they do not square with the real odds outside the studio.
65
5 Conclusion
How durable are the methods and results that I have described here? Will the rise
of DVDs and the international market and the declining share of domestic theatri￾cal revenue in total gross change matters? I think not because this research has
looked for deeper patterns that have a universal order. We know that international
revenues, and revenues in many foreign countries, follow the same Paretian pattern
(even with the same tail weight). Thus, culture and local arrangements in specific
countries do not alter the universal pattern. In each country where a film plays,
its revenues follow a similar dynamic where choice, mixture and aggregation are
the stable operators. Necessarily, they will result in a stable distribution of box
office revenues. The same points hold for DVD sales. The timing of these sales
does help in resolving the nobody knows problem for the later markets. If foreign
theatrical distribution is later than domestic release, then the foreign film buyers
have prior information on which to condition their estimates. The same point holds
for DVDs; the theatrical run reveals prior information not available at the initial
opening. And, we should be able to do better in predicting revenues.25
Nothing I have said changes when we open the analysis to include these mar￾kets. All the results and techniques apply to them. But, prior information, garnered
from the North American theatrical run, lets us to make better estimates of out￾comes in the downstream markets (just as the second and third run theaters had
prior information from the first run theaters in the days before the Paramount de￾cision). This prior information can be incorporated by conditioning the probability
estimates of the stable distributions of foreign and DVD markets on the North
American grosses. Lastly, just to show that things never change, piracy is pushing
the studios to release films simultaneously in all markets, domestic, foreign, and
25I am told that the price charged for a foreign release is conditioned on its domestic revenues,
meaning the latter are a good predictor of foreign revenue.
66
DVD. Thus, the prior information revealed in the North American run is gradually
washing away in the battle against piracy. And we shall then once again be up
against the full force of the nobody knows principle.
The research reported here shows clearly that anyone who thinks he knows
how much a movie will gross doesn’t know what he is doing. He would have to
have a model and we have seen there isn’t one. If there were a model, making
movies would be easy and no one would ever lose money. Movies are prospects,
probability distributions as ephemeral as the images on the screen. It has to be
this way because movies are creative products—they are pure information and the
revenue they might earn is just a number—pure information—with no natural scale
or limit.
I hope I have shown there are powerful ideas and tools that we can use to reveal
the deeper order of this seemingly chaotic, challenging, and endlessly fascinating
business of the movies. I believe these tools can be a constructive basis of a new
economics of art and culture.
67
Appendix
What is the role of stability in the movies? Theoretically, if the random revenues
of movies aggregated over choices, theaters, weeks, and movies are stable, then
the distributions of these sums all will be similar. The concept of stability means
that the distribution of sums of random variables is similar to the distribution of
the random variables (this is defined more precisely below). This implies that each
observed sequence of random variables or sums of random variables of a stream
of box office revenues has the same distribution and is only a different view of the
underlying process. The concept of similarity, or self-similarity, is used extensively
in this chapter and leads to deep insights about the movie business.
The other important property for motion pictures of stable or self-similar pro￾cesses is that they have limiting distributions. This means that the distributional
dynamics will converge on a stable distribution and the distribution will be rela￾tively unaffected by the initial conditions. Despite all the uncertainty about where
motion picture revenues may go, they will converge on a statistical attractor. Con￾sequently, the statistical attractors and the underlying dynamics have a deep prop￾erty: they are stable and convergent. Finally, self-similar, stable processes need not
have a finite mean or variance, a very important property of the movies.
Taken together, the properties of stable aggregation, non-finite variance, and
self-similarity give us a way of coming to grips with the “wild” uncertainty in the
movies. They make the probability distributions of outcomes central to the study
of this industry. Let me briefly discuss stable distributions and their properties. I
highly recommend G. Samorodnitsky and M. S. Taqqu (1994) as an authoritative
text on stable processes and stable distributions.
Most readers know that the Central Limit Theorem states that the sum of a
large number of iid random variables with finite variance converges to a Normal
68
distribution. What they may not know is that if the finite variance assumption does
not hold true of the random variables, then the Generalized Central Limit The￾orem states that the limiting distribution must be a member of the stable class.
Informally, the term ‘stable’ is used because when iid members of a stable fam￾ily are added the shape of the distribution does not change. The distribution ob￾tained by adding random variables is equivalent to convolving their probabilities.
If the “shape” of the convolved distribution of sums is similar to the distributions
of the random variables, the distribution is stable. A random variable is stable if
P
ni=1 Yi ≃D Y for any n where the symbol ≃D means equal in distribution. The
distribution of stable random variables and their sums is similar. Remarkably, a
random variable is stable as soon as the equality is true for n = 2 and 3. Surpris￾ingly, this implies that the sum of revenues of two or three small budget movies
have the same probability of hitting a revenue of, say, X as a large budget movie.
An equivalent way to define stability is in linear transformations of the probability
distribution. Two random variables are similar in distribution if there exist con￾stants a and b > 0 such that Y ≃D a + bX. That is, Y and X are similar in
distribution if the distribution of Y is a linear transformation of the distribution of
X.
Stability means that the dynamics lead to a stable attractor since the sequence
of sums of a stable random variable is stable or self-similar. A stronger statement
is this: the distribution function F possesses a domain of attraction if and only if
it is stable. The limiting distribution function FX of independent r.v.’s Xk belongs
to the domain of attraction of F if there exist normalizing constants an, bn > 0
such that the distribution of (P ni=1 Xi − an)/bn → F. The Normal (Gaussian)
distribution is stable, but it is the only stable distribution with a finite variance. The
Pareto, L´evy, and Cauchy distributions are the other (named) stable distributions.
But, there are many other members of the stable class, whose functional forms
69
cannot be given. L´evy characterized the class of stable distributions through their
characteristic function. A stable distribution X ∼ S(α, β, γ, δ) is a four-parameter
distribution with characteristic function given by
C(t) = ( exp(−γα|t|α[1 + iβ(tan πα
2
)(sign t)((γ|t|)1−α − 1)] if α 6 = 1
exp(−γ|t|[1 + iβ 2π (sign t)(ln |t| + ln γ)] if α = 1
The exponent α is a measure of the probability weight in the upper and lower
tails of the distribution; it has a range of 0 < α ≤ 2 and the variance of the stable
distribution is infinite when α < 2. The basin of attraction is characterized by
the tail weight of the distribution (α). This remarkable feature tells us that the
weight assigned to extreme events is the key distinguishing property of a stable
probability distribution. The skewness coefficient −1 ≤ β ≤ 1 is a measure of
the asymmetry of the distribution. Stable distributions need not be symmetric; they
may be skewed more in their upper tail than in their lower tail. The scale parameter
γ must be positive. It expands or contracts the distribution in a non-linear way
about the location parameter δ which is the center of the distribution.
The tails of a stable distribution are Paretian and moments of order ≥ 2 do not
exist when α < 2. This is typical of motion picture revenues. Its mean need not
exist for values of α < 1. This is true of the cumulative grosses of movies made
by actors.
The α-stable distribution becomes the Cauchy distribution when α = 1 and β = 0. The stable distribution is the L´evy distribution when α = 0.5 and β = ±1.
When α = 2 the skew parameter ceases to have any impact and the stable dis￾tribution has only two parameters (δ, γ) the mean and variance of the symmetric
Gaussian distribution. The general stable distribution contains the L´evy, Pareto,
Cauchy and Normal distributions for specific values of the parameters. It need not
be symmetrical; thus, the upper and lower tails may differ. This is precisely what
we would expect to find for motion picture profit because the lower tail is limited
70
by expenditures while the upper tail is essentially unlimited.
Aside from these theoretical properties of stable-distributed random variables,
the sample statistics are unusual and they befuddle standard analysis that is too
often based on the Normal distribution. For one thing, the sample variance (not the
theoretical variance, which is infinite) increases with the size of the sample. For
another thing, the sample average is volatile. Just one movie can move the average
in a dramatic way. Indeed, the sample average (X1 + X2 + . . . + Xn)/n has the
same distribution as Xkn1/α−1 where Xk is any term in the sum. If α < 1 then the
maximum value contributes heavily to the average. This is true, though to a lesser
extent, when 1 < α < 2. This is the Titanic effect wherein a single movie may
contribute a large portion of the sum of movie revenues in a year. Since the average
is a linear combination of stable random variables, it too is stable-distributed. This
means that sample averages are unreliable and that the perils of forecasting future
events from past averages are large. Forecasts have an infinite variance as well.
71
References
Bach, S. (1986). Final Cut: Dreams and Disaster in the Making of Heaven’s Gate.
New American Library, New York.
Cassady, R. (1959). Monopoly in motion picture production and distribution:
1908–1915. Southern California Law Review, 32:325–390.
Cassady Jr., R. and Cassady III, R. (1974). The private antitrust suit in ameri￾can business competition. Working paper, Bureau of Business and Economic
Research, University of California, Los Angeles.
Caves, R. E. (2000). Creative Industries: Contracts between Art and Commerce.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Chisholm, D. (1995). Actor fixed effects and incentives in motion-pictures share
contracts. Technical report, Lehigh University.
Chisholm, D. C. (1996). Continuous degrees of residual claimancy: Some contrac￾tual evidence. Applied Economics Letters, 3(11):739–41.
Chisholm, D. C. (1997). Profit-sharing versus fixed-payment contracts: Evidence
from the motion pictures industry. Journal of Law, Economics and Organiza￾tion, 13(1):169–201.
Chung, K. H. and Cox, R. A. K. (1994). A stochastic model of superstardom:
An application of the Yule distribution. Review of Economics and Statistics,
76(4):771–775.
Coase, R. H. (1937). The nature of the firm. Economica, 4:386–405.
Collins, A., Hand, C., and Snell, M. (forthcoming). What makes a blockbuster?
72
Economic analysis of film success in the United Kingdom. Journal of Deci￾sion Analysis.
Conant, M. (1960). Antitrust in the Motion Picture Industry: Economic and Legal
Analysis. University of California Press, Berkeley.
De Vany, A. (2003a). Contracting with artists when nobody knows anything. In
Hollywood Economics: How Extreme Uncertainty Shapes the Film Industry,
chapter 11, pages 431–478. Routledge, London.
De Vany, A. (2003b). Hollywood Economics: How Extreme Uncertainty Shapes
the Film Industry. Routledge, London.
De Vany, A. and Eckert, R. (1991). Motion picture antitrust: The Paramount cases
revisited. Research in Law and Economics, 14:51–112.
De Vany, A. and Lee, C. (2001). Quality signals in information cascades and the
dynamics of the distribution of motion picture box office revenues. Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, 25:593–614.
De Vany, A. and Lee, C. (2003). Stochastic market structure: Concentration mea￾sures and motion picture antitrust. In Hollywood Economics: How Extreme
Uncertainty Shapes the Film Industry, chapter 9, pages 351–371. Routledge,
London.
De Vany, A. and McMillan, H. (2004). Was the antitrust action that broke up the
studios good for the movies? evidence from the stock market. American Law
and Economics Review, 6(4):135–152.
De Vany, A., Taleb, N., and Spitznagle, M. (2005). Can we shield actors from
“wild” uncertainty. Working paper, Ars Analytica and Empirica, LLC.
73
De Vany, A. and Walls, W. D. (1996). Bose-Einstein dynamics and adap￾tive contracting in the motion picture industry. The Economic Journal,
439(106):1493–1514.
De Vany, A. and Walls, W. D. (1997). The market for motion pictures: Rank,
revenue and survival. Economic Inquiry, 4(35):783–797.
De Vany, A. and Walls, W. D. (1999). Uncertainty in the movie industry: Does star
power reduce the terror of the box office? Journal of Cultural Economics,
23(4):285–318.
De Vany, A. and Walls, W. D. (2002). Does Hollywood make too many r-rated
movies? risk, stochastic dominance, and the illusion of expectation. Journal
of Business, 75(3):425–51.
De Vany, A. and Walls, W. D. (2003a). Big budgets, big openings, and legs: Anal￾ysis of the blockbuster strategy. In Hollywood Economics: How Extreme
Uncertainty Shapes the Film Industry, chapter 6, pages 223–252. Routledge,
London.
De Vany, A. and Walls, W. D. (2003b). The breakdown of herding. In Hollywood
Economics: How Extreme Uncertainty Shapes the Film Industry, chapter 3,
pages 89–116. Routledge, London.
De Vany, A. and Walls, W. D. (2004). Motion picture profit, the stable paretian
hypothesis, and the curse of the superstar. Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control, 28(6):1035–1057.
Einav, L. (2004). Not all rivals look alike: Estimating an equilibrium model of
the release date timing game. Technical report, Stanford Department of Eco￾nomics, Stanford, CA.
74
Federal Trade Commission (1965). Paramount Pictures Inc., ET AL. Consent
Judgments and Decrees Investigation. Report of Federal Trade Commission,
Washington, D.C.
Ghosh, A. (2000). The size distribution of international box office revenues and the
stable Paretian hypothesis. Working paper, Economics department, University
of California at Irvine.
Goldman, W. (1983). Adventures in the Screen Trade. Warner Books, New York.
Groves, T. (1973). Incentives in teams. Econometrica, 41:617–31.
Hamlen, W. A. J. (1994). Variety and superstardom in popular music. Economic
Inquiry, 32(3):395–406.
Hand, C. (2001). Increasing returns to information: further evidence from the UK
film market. Applied Economics Letters, pages 419–421.
Krider, R. and Weinberg, C. (1998). Competitive dynamics and the introduction
of new products: The motion picture timing game. Journal of Marketing
Research, 35(1):1–15.
Lee, C. (1999). Competitive dynamics and the distribution of box office revenues
in motion pictures: The stable-paretian hypothesis. Doctoral dissertation, De￾partment of Economics, University of California, Irvine.
Litman, B. (1990). The motion picture entertainment industry. In Adams, W.,
editor, The Structure of American Industry, pages 183–216. Macmillan, New
York.
Litwak, M. (1986). Reel Power: The Struggle for Influence and Success in the New
Hollywood. William Morrow, New York.
75
Mandelbrot, B. (1963a). New methods in statistical economics. Journal of Political
Economy, 71:421–440.
Mandelbrot, B. (1963b). The variation of certain speculative prices. Journal of
Business, 36:394–419.
McCulloch, J. H. (1998). Linear regression with stable disturbances. In Adler,
R. J., Feldman, R. E., and Taqqu, M. S., editors, A Practical Guide to Heavy
Tails: Statistical Techniques and Applications, pages 359–378. Birkhauser,
Berlin.
McKensie, J. (2003). Box office revenue distributions, paretian tails, and survival
analysis. Draft Thesis, University of Sydney.
Ravid, S. A. (1999). Information, blockbusters and stars: A study of the film
industry. Journal of Business, 72:463–486.
Rosen, S. (1981). The economics of superstars. American Economic Review,
71:167–183.
Scherer, F. M., Harhoff, D., and Kukies, J. (2000). Uncertainty and the size distri￾bution of rewards from innovation. Evolutionary Economics, 10:175–200.
Seagrave, K. (1997). American Films Abroad: Hollywoods Domination of the
Worlds Movie Screens from the 1890s to the Present. McFarland & Co., Jef￾ferson, NC.
Sedgewick, J. (2001). Popular Filmgoing in 1930s Britain: A Choice of Pleasures.
Exeter University Press, Exeter.
Simon, H. A. (1955). On a class of skew distribution functions. Biometrica,
52:425–440.
76
Sornette, D. and Zajdenweber, D. (1999). The economic return of research: The
Pareto law and its implications. European Physical Journal B, 8(4):653–664.
Taleb, N. (2001). Fooled by Randomness. Texere, New York.
Walls, W. D. (1997). Increasing returns to information: Evidence from the Hong
Kong movie market. Applied Economics Letters, 4(5):187–190.
Walls, W. D. (2002). Review of John Sedgewick, Popular Filmgoing in 1930s
Britain: A Choice of Pleasures. Journal of Cultural Economics, pages 298–
301.
Walls, W. D. (2003). Modeling heavy tails and skewness in film returns. Technical
report, University of Calgary.
Walls, W. D. (2004). Modeling movie success when ‘nobody knows anything’:
Conditional stable-distribution analysis of film returns. Journal of Cultural
Economics.
Weinstein, M. (1998). Profit-sharing contracts in Hollywood: Evolution and anal￾ysis. Journal of Legal Studies, 27(1):67–112.
77
Figure 1: The Stable, Normal, and Empirical Distributions of Profit
78
Figure 2: The Linear Upper Region of the Log Rank versus Log Revenue Distri￾bution for Star and non-Star Movies
79
Figure 3: Average Cumulative Profit of Films by Date of Release
80
