REIHE INFORMATIK
5/96
Abstracting Digital Movies Automatically
S. Pfeier, R. Lienhart, S. Fischer und W. Eelsberg
Universität Mannheim
Praktische Informatik IV
L 15, 16
D-68131 Mannheim
Abstracting Digital Movies Automatically
Silvia Pfeier, Rainer Lienhart, Stephan Fischer and
Wolfgang Eelsberg
Praktische Informatik IV
University of Mannheim
D-68131 Mannheim
pfeiffer@pi4.informatik.uni-mannheim.de
Abstract
Large video on demand databases consisting of thousands of digital movies
are not easy to handle: the user must have an attractive means to retrieve his movie of choice. For analog video, movie trailers are produced to allow
a quick preview and perhaps stimulate possible buyers. This paper presents
techniques to automatically produce such movie abstracts of digtial videos.
1 Introduction
In the context of video on demand, it is vital to provide an ecient and user-friendly
means to select a video from a large video archive. In current movie marketing, it
is common to produce a trailer (a short summary) of a movie in order to get
people interested. Similarly, television journalists can retrieve relevant clips for
a report from large digital archives. With a vast number of stored videos in a
video archive, it is not possible to produce by hand a trailer for every video stored.
Therefore, we have thought about ways to create video abstracts automatically
and have implemented a prototype system named VAbstract. Other work on this
topic is often based on textual abstracts generated from captions (e.g. [dV96]), or
they extract still images only (see e.g. [ADHC94], [Ror93], [TATH95], [TATS94],
[YYWL95], [ZSW95], [ZLSW95]). In contrast, we automatically produce a short
movie abstract based on automatic content analysis of the video.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 denes a video abstract and ex￾plains some basic decisions for our abstracting research. Section 3 presents some
simple abstracting concepts and shows that these straight-forward approaches are
not very satisfactory. Section 4 describes properties of trailers and psychological
experiences about the video perception process. These are used in Section 5 to de￾rive our new algorithms. Section 6 presents the prototype VAbstract with which the
experimental results of Section 7 were produced. Section 8 describes some related work and Section 9 concludes the paper.
2 Video Abstracting Terms
2.1 Denition
We all know what an abstract of an article is: it is a short summary of the content of
a longer document which is used to preselect articles relevant to the user. Analogous
to this denition, we dene a video abstract to be a sequence of still or moving
images presenting the content of a video in suchaway that the respective target
1
group is rapidly provided with concise information about the content while the
essential message of the original is preserved.1
2.2 Pro ject Decisions
Basic decisions had to be made about the type of material that will be used as input,
the kind of abstracting procedure and the type of material that will be produced
as output by our abstracting system.
2.2.1 Input Material
As known from cinema trailers, dierent types of material can be used for the
production of a common movie trailer: unchanged material from the original movie,
revised material and/or material that was not used in the original. In our pro ject, we use only unchanged material from the original movie. The reason is that in a
video on demand archive, only the original movie and no additional material from
the movie production process is available in the database. Our system will work on
any video archive, independent of additional sources of information.
2.2.2 Target Group
From the above-given denition follows that the quality of an abstract can only
be judged in view of a specic target group. For example, the aim of viewers of
documentaries is to receive information, whereas the aim of feature lm viewers is
entertainment. Therefore, these abstracts should dier: a documentary abstract
should give an overview of the contents of the entire video whereas a feature lm
abstract should be entertaining in itself and not reveal the end of the story. In
feature lms, the main actors and their dialogs are very important - they are of no
particular interest in documentaries. The audio content, however, is of high interest
in documentaries. In our pro ject, we concentrate on abstracting feature lms.
2.2.3 Abstracting Method
There are several methods to produce an abstract from a video:  manual abstracting: the material for the abstract is completely chosen by a
human.  semi-automatic abstracting: the rst choice of material is made by a computer,
and a human will produce the nal abstract interactively.  automatic abstracting: the abstract is completely produced by a computer
based on preset parameters.
Our abstracting system is automatic.
2.2.4 Still- vs. Moving-Images Abstracts and Audio Abstracting
There are two fundamentally dierent abstracts that can be produced from the
picture stream: still- and moving-images abstracts. A still-images abstract is a
collection of extracted salient images. If one frame is extracted per scene, these
frames are called keyframes, as they identify a scene. A moving-images abstract
consists of a collection of sequences of images from the original movie and is thus a
proper movie itself. 1
In the scientic literature, there is no common accepted denition of the term "video abstract".
We believe to have given a denition that is wide enough to comprise all former usage of this term,
but narrow enough to contain no more than necessary. 2
Similarly, two types of audio abstracts can be distingished: single-word and
continuous-audio abstracts. It is possible, to translate the spoken words through
speech recognition into text and then use the classic methods of information retrieval
from text [SM83]. Such methods usually produce a list of keywords identifying the
content. In a movie there are also other important sounds besides speech. In order
to keep all the important sounds, we decided to abstract the audio by extracting
continuous parts of the sound track. The most important decision was whether our abstracting system should pro￾duce a still- or a moving-images abstract. There are big dierences between still￾and moving-images abstracts. A still-images abstract can be built much faster, as
less data has to be handled. Once composed, it is displayed more easily, as there
are no timing or synchronization constraints. It is even possible to display simul￾taneously several images next to each other such that the temporal order of events
are displayed in a spatial order and can be grasped more quickly by the user. Such
a collection of stills can also be printed out very easily. There are also advantages to a moving-images abstract. Compared to a still￾images abstract, it makes much more sense to use the original audio information
for a moving-images abstract. The possibly higher computational eort during the
abstracting process pays o during playback time: the abstract can be displayed
on common TV sets, its playback is much more natural for the user, as watching a
trailer (i.e. a moving-images abstract) is much more exciting than watching a slide
show (i.e. a still-images abstract), any kind of blurriness that turns up is caused by
real movement and not by an accidental choice of an unfocused image, and in many
videos the motion is information-bearing. These very important advantages led us
to produce a moving-images abstracting system.
3 Straight-forward Concepts
3.1 Express Run-Through
The easiest way to get a fast overview of a video is the usage of a fast-preview mode,
as known from VCRs. When a video database user wants to get a quick overview
of several longer videos, this is not very satisfying for several reasons:  The maximum compression factor possible with this approach is between 3
to 1 and 6 to 1, as otherwise the plot happens too quickly to be grasped.
Therefore, it usually takes much longer than desired to browse a video.  The cut frequency is raised by the time-lapse factor. This heavily overstrains
human concentration because of a much elevated cut frequency, becoming
unbearable especially when watching more than two or three abstracts.  The audio of the original cannot be used, as it would make no sense to the
viewer when played-back fast. Therefore a user can only make use of the
information available from the picture track.
All in all, this is a method for situations requiring a detailed overview of a short
video, e.g. for nding a desired point in the video. This method is easily imple￾mented. It is, however, unsuitable for our aim of composing a trailer automatically. 3.2 Random Choice of Scenes/Images
Instead of using an intelligent method to select scenes or images for an abstract, one
might propose that a random choice may result in an abstract of just as good a qual￾ity. However, for representing the characteristic contents of an original, the compres￾sion factor must be kept low, i.e. a vast amount of scenes/images must be extracted.
3
Such a sample survey will almost certainly include irrelevant scenes or images with
little information. Thus, this method could only be used for semi-automatic ab￾stracting. The information content of the abstract will often be mediocre. Again,
this method is very easy to implement.
4 Good-Quality Abstracts
When watching cinema trailers, one becomes aware of some properties of good video
abstracts. We feel that these are the following:
[P1] Important Objects/People
The most important ob jects and/or actors appearing in the original also ap￾pear in the trailer.
[P2] Action
Many scenes in a trailer include a lot of action.
[P3] Mood
A trailer represents a very similar mood to that of the original movie. Emo￾tionally important scenes are included.
[P4] Dialogs
Dialog scenes often include important information such as a change of action
or atmosphere and are therefore often included in trailers.
[P5] Disguise End
The end of the movie is never revealed as the story's thrill is often released
there.
VAbstract aims at extracting scenes from the original movie according to these
rules. Taking a look at some psychological experiences about the perception of
video helps us in converting the above-mentioned properties into algorithms:
[E1] Contrast Perception
The human visual system is mainly based on perception of contrast [LN91].
Lines and contours are then determined from the contrasts, and only on their
basis is the perception of forms and ob jects performed. The brain goes through
a multi-stage pattern-matching process with stored patterns in memory. It
can even complete missing parts of an image in order to recognize shapes.
This process is much faster with images or scenes containing high contrast.
[E2] Color Perception
The perception of colors depends on the context of their appearance: espe￾cially their perceived brightness and saturation depend on the relative dier￾ence of brightness and saturation to those of other colors in the same picture or
in adjoining pictures. For example, a dark color may appear relatively bright
next to an even darker color, or very dark next to bright colors. Colors are
fundamentally important to the transfer of emotions. Thus, it is important
that the basic color contents of a video are preserved to represent the mood
of a video.2
[E3] Context Perception
C. Pryluck et al. [PTS82] have shown that the sequence of scenes or images
in a video has a strong inuence on their impression on the viewer. In their
book, they refer to an experiment by H.D. Goldberg with a scene of a child
2
Imagine an abstract of the movie "Water World" without scenes of the ocean!
4
riding a tricycle on the road. He showed this scene together with either images
of a happy family life or of busy roads. Depending on the context in which
the tricycle scene was shown, people associated dierent meanings with the
scene. The sequence in which scenes are put together strongly inuences the
perceived content of the abstract. Therefore, we havt to be very careful not
to present scenes in our trailer in a misleading context.
[E4] Stimuli Processing
Inputs from the eye rst go to the sensory memory where they are available
for analysis for about 150 msec. During this time, the next image has to
arrive such that an impression of movement will result [LN91]. Psychological
experiments have proven that the human visual system takes about 400 to
700 msec to process one visual stimulus. If there are several stimuli that must
be processed together, some kind of parallel processing is possible, but each
additional stimulus takes about 100 to 300 msec longer. As the short-term
memory cannot register more than about 5 to 9 items, we can now calculate
the time that a human needs to completely analyze a scene, i.e. to recognize
all ob jects that he / she is able to recognize jointly:
150 msec for recognizing movement
+ 700 msec for the first stimulus
+ 2400 msec for at most 8 additional items
= 3.25 sec Therefore, a scene must be at least 3:25 sec long to get completely analyzed.3
If, however, all extracted scenes are that short, this strains the concentration
of the viewer. For taking up at most 50% of a viewer's full mental capacity, we conclude that the average of the lengths of all extracted scenes for the
abstract should exceed 6:5 sec. We are aware of the fact that these arguments
are very vague but we use them as a rst approximation.
5 Algorithmic Realization
The design of our algorithms is based on the afore-mentioned properties of cin￾ema trailers taking into account the psychological experiences about human video
perception.
The basic entity for automatic abstracting is a scene: our goal is to extract a number of scenes from the original fullling properties P1 to P5. Therefore, cut
detection has to be performed rst (see e.g. [ZKS93] [ZMM95] [HJW95] [AHC94]
[SK95]). As we intend to include audio, an audio cut detection [Ger96] has to be
performed as well so as not to include meaningless audio pieces. Scene limits are
now dened by an audio and a video cut.
For the extraction of important ob jects/people (property P1), we can make an
essential simplication: It is not necessary to explicitly recognize ob jects or people
in order to include them in the abstract. When enough scenes or still images are
extracted from the original, it is statistically unlikely that an ob ject turning up
often in the original would not be part of the abstract. Recognition of ob jects or
people by the viewer is also ensured from parts of a video, and when images/scenes
with high contrast are chosen, ob jects are recognized more quickly, according to rule
E1. Therefore, an algorithm for extraction of high-contrast scenes is implemented
(see e.g. [Jai89]). Ob ject/people recognition itself is left to the human.
3We assume that there are usually at least 9 items to be recognized within a scene.
5
For the identication of high-action scenes (property P2), it suces to dene
"action" through "motion" in our context. It does not matter whether we nd
a lot of camera or ob ject motion - both have their part in determining "action".
Therefore, simple frame dierence calculations suce (see e.g. [MB94]). If a high
degree of motion is recognized in a scene, we conclude that it should be included
in the abstract.
As rule E2 tells us, colors are an important component for the perception of a
video's mood (property P3). As we want to represent the basic mood of the original
movie in the abstract, it is necessary to extract scenes that have a basic color
composition similar to the average color composition of the whole movie. Color
composition is calculated based on brightness, color composition and saturation (see
e.g. [Jai89]).
Recognition of dialog scenes (property P4) can be performed heuristically on the
audio track. The audio signal is transferred to a short-term frequency spectrum and
the fundamental frequency is extracted [Win82]. After normalizing, the spectrum
is compared to the spectrum of a spoken "a" in order to distinguish between speech
and other sounds or noise. A dialog is then characterized through the existence
of two such "a"s with signicantly dierent fundamental frequencies, identifying
scenes with at least two dierent speakers [Ain76] [EH93]. The "a" is used because
it occurs frequently in most languages, and because it is usually spoken as a long
sound, improving the rate of recognition. This method is much easier to implement
than a complete speaker recognition.
The end of a feature lm can be disguised (property P5) by partitioning the video
into several parts of equal length and not using the last part for abstracting. In
our experiments, we have subdivided feature lms into ten parts, not using the last
one for abstracting. This should suce for disguising the end.
In order to reduce the possibility of a misleading context change for a scene
between the original movie and the abstract, the selected scenes should at least be
presented in their original sequence. An exception can be made for extracted title
frames which may be appended to the feature lm abstract, as this is a common
habit in trailer production. However, when selected scenes are simply concate￾nated, a new, unintended context can still result, as scenes which were shown in a
certain context now appear with dierent neighbor scenes. Therefore, the abstract
synthesis should include some black frames with silence between the selected
scenes in order to clearly indicate to the viewer that these are single scenes "without
context".
6 VAbstract: the Prototype Video Abstracting Sys￾tem
We have implemented a prototype video abstracting system called VAbstract fol￾lowing the scheme outlined above. Although this system is still at an early stage,
it is already usable for producing abstracts automatically.
6.1 The Concept
Figure 1 shows a ow chart of the implemented system. The extracted scenes must
each be longer than 3.25 sec. In our rst approach, we select at most one dialog,
one high-motion and one high-contrast scene from each of the examined parts of the
video, leaving out the last part when analyzing a feature lm. The user determines
the desired length of the abstract, e.g. 120 sec. If with the selected scenes, the
abstract is not complete, it is lled up with scenes which have an average color
6
close to the average color composition of the whole video. If too many scenes were chosen, less suitable ones are dropped again. Afterwards, those frames from
the video bearing the title can be selected. Finally, the abstract is synthesized by
composing the selecteded scenes with their audio, separating them by black frames
with silence, and either appending or prepending the title frames.
VAbstract is also usable as a still-images abstracting system. It determines
important scenes to be extracted. It is then possible to simply select one (e.g. the
center) frame from each scene for an abstract. Such a still-images abstract would be much denser in content than a simple still-images abstract that includes one picture
from every scene of the video.
to form abstract
Title desired?
No Yes
Add Title Frames
Yes No
Determine Scene
exclude Last Part
Partition Video and
Extract
Extract
Extract
Abstract complete ?
Boundaries
Dialog Scenes
High-Motion Scenes
High-Contrast Scenes
 Composition Scenes
Extract Average Color
Compose selected scenes
Figure 1: Abstracting Algorithm
7
6.2 Status of Implementation
VAbstract was implemented in about 1500 lines of ANSI C using the Vista library
V2.1.3 [PKL95] [PL95]. The audio modules are currently still missing. Title ex￾traction must be done by hand, but we are close to an automatic solution [LS96].
 
Figure 2: User Interface for VAbstract
 
Figure 3: Provider Interface for VAbstract
Two example application interfaces were built in about another 2500 lines of
Tcl/Tk code on top of VAbstract: a user interface assisting a video librarian in
selecting a video (see Figure 2) and a "provider" interface supporting a video library
provider in the construction and administration of a video library (see Figure 3).
7 Experimental Results
The movies for our experiments were recorded from German television, digitized
byaParallax video board and stored as a collection of JPEG frames. We reduced
the frame grabbing rate to about 4 frames/s so that we were able to keep all the
8
analyzed videos on disc. For 1 hour of video, digitizing and preprocessing took
about 4 hours. Experiments were performed on a cartoon video, on TV series and
on a feature lm.
Abstracting of a documentary was tried as well. In this case, we also included
the last part of the video because documentaries do not have a "showdown". We
found out that documentaries on TV often have a predened structure similar to
chapters in a book: a group of scenes is devoted to one topic. There are clear
semantic boundaries, e.g. speaker scenes, between the "chapters". In this case, we
have provided the possibility to manually pre-partition the video before using our
abstracting algorithms on each part. This guarantees that the abstract has relevant
scenes from each part even if some of them are low in motion or contrast.
For our experiments, we chose movies for which a manually produced abstract
(trailer) was available. For example each episode of the TV series "Twin Peaks"
started with a short (human-generated) summary of the previous episode. Thus we were able to compare the man-made abstracts with our automatically produced
ones. Table 1 gives an overview of the seven videos which we analyzed.
Video video
length
[min]
video
length
[frames] number
of
scenes
in video
trailer type trailer
length
[sec] number
of
scenes
in
trailer
Beverley Hills 45 488 9.707 preview 38 9
Melrose Place 47 510 10.046 preview 34 11
Twin Peaks (SP) 48 264 10.326 summary 64 21
Twin Peaks (TB) 46 313 9.965 summary 48 21
Star Trek 51 425 10.874 summary 120 45
Flintstones 35 218 7.550 none  
Indiana Jones 115 761 24.492 none   Table 1: Overview of analyzed videos and their original trailers
Our experiences with trailers have shown that some of the afore-stated properties
of good abstracts do not apply to all kinds of trailers: previews usually concentrate
on the one most important scene of the next episode, whereas summaries include
the last part of the abstracted video, as this usually contains the foundation for the
action of the next episode. TV series trailers therefore fundamentally dier from
movie trailers. VAbstract extracts scenes a lot more evenly spread over the whole
length of the original than over a man-made preview or summary. We have also discovered that manually produced abstracts usually do not contain
scenes in their original time order. Often, suchachange of sequence is performed
deliberately to produce a new context, which did not exist in the original video.
The reason might be to compress a long and complicated story into a shorter but
still suitable version which is more impressive to the viewer.
Another basic dierence between manually produced trailers and our approach
is that scenes for trailers are often not included as a whole. A human can easily
extract the important part of a scene for the story, whereas our system is more or less
ignorant of the main action stream. Although we compare the results of our system
to the manually produced trailers, one has to keep in mind that our algorithms are
based on "syntactic" parameters and not on the story. Our prototype is still based
9
only on the picture stream, and the mainline of the story often occurs in the audio
stream. Future versions of VAbstract will include audio analysis, and we expect
them to work better.
In Table 2 we give an overview of the abstracts that we produced with VAbstract. From the shorter movies we produced 2 and 4 min long abstracts, Star Trek had
a longer trailer, so we produced an additional 8 min abstract, and from Indiana
Jones, we produced 6, 8 and 10 min abstracts.
It is quite interesting to examine the duration of the production process for these
abstracts. The numbers are of course dependent on the speed of the machine, the
amount of main memory available and the average load of the machine, but they
indicate the duration of each abstracting step. When an abstract is produced for
the rst time, this takes about 6 to 7 times the length of the original lm because
cut detection has to be performed, and our cut detection algorithm is not very
ecient. The results from cut detection are saved in a le such that subsequent
abstracting runs are performed much faster. There is a basic abstracting duration
of about 10 min for each video. For each 120 sec of abstract length about 5 min
abstracting duration have to be calculated additionally. Our results were produced
on a DECalpha 3000 running OSF/1 V3.2.
Video 120 sec
abstract
240 sec
abstract
360 sec
abstract
480 sec
abstract
600 sec
abstract
Beverley Hills 13 scenes 23 scenes    Melrose Place 6 scenes 11 scenes    Twin Peaks (SP) 10 scenes 18 scenes    Twin Peaks (TB) 6 scenes 12 scenes    Star Trek 9 scenes 22 scenes  35 scenes  Flintstones 9 scenes 20 scenes   
Indiana Jones   28 scenes 31 scenes 34 scenes
Table 2: Number of scenes of each generated abstract
Table 3 compares the automatically produced abstracts with the man-made
trailers (where available). Although some scenes are obviously identical, there is still
a large amount of dierence, reasons having been mentioned above. The dierence
when viewing the abstracts may not be as big, because there are always similar
scenes in a video from which both automatic and manual abstracter have to choose,
and they usually do not decide on the same scene.
Video 120 sec
abstract
240 sec
abstract
360 sec
abstract
480 sec
abstract
600 sec
abstract
Beverley Hills 1 3    Melrose Place 0 0    Twin Peaks (SP) 2 3    Twin Peaks (TB) 3 5    Star Trek 3 4  6  Table 3: Comparison of abstracts and trailers: number of identical scenes
10
Some descriptive words on the sub jective quality of the abstracts may be allowed
here. We believe that the abstracts are already quite good for a prototype system:
usually, all important places of action are extracted. The abstracts are better
for feature lms than for TV series, as the series usually contain more than one
action stream which makes it more dicult for a user to follow. When watching
the abstracts, a lack of thrill is noticeable. The reasons may be that too many
uninteresting scenes for the mainline story were also extracted. More important is
the missing audio: it is well known that background music is the most important
feature for construction of thrill!
As the experiments have shown, the system already produces acceptable ab￾stracts even though some algorithms are not yet implemented. It has been shown
that a proper person/ob ject recognition is not necessary as the most important peo￾ple/ob jects did appear in the abstract thanks to our action- and motion-detection
algorithms. An additional implementation of person identication could be used to
avoid a strong concentration on a single, very active person. It has also been shown
that the missing dialog and title recognition are very important; they are currently
being implemented.
8 Related Work
8.1 Still-Images Abstracting Systems
The rst digital video browsers reported in the literature collected still images,
usually extracting the images at equal distances (see e.g. [MCW92]). These images were then reduced in size and displayed in sequence. No attention was paid to
semantic issues.
There are now more advanced systems of this type (see e.g. [ADHC94], [Ror93],
[TATH95], [TATS94], [YYWL95], [ZSW95], [ZLSW95]). Most newer systems rst
perform a segmentation of the video based on the detection of scenes (shots) and
then select a frame from each scene (shot). Sometimes not merely the rst frame is
chosen, but the rst one of good quality or the rst one that satises certain color
or motion requirements. This ensures a more content-related extraction of still
images. As there are usually still a vast number of extracted images which need to
be handled, some systems try to reduce this number by making a selection based
on camera movement or on content. There are even some systems that enhance
their extracted still images by some means to playback small sequences of images as
moving images. As they usually select a block of frames around an extracted frame
for displaying or let the user choose the scenes via extracted frames, their result is
not considered to be a real moving-images abstract.
Most current still-images abstracts serve as an index for users, for easier selection
of the viewing start position. Therefore, the browsing function of such systems is very distinct, whereas the abstracting function is usually only rudimentary. Usually, audio is not included in still-images abstracts.4
8.2 Video Skimming
M. A. Smith and T. Kanade from Carnegie Mellon University propose a method
to extract the signicant audio and video information from a video, creating a
skim video representing a short synopsis of the original [SK95]. They perform this
4Taniguchi et al. [TATH95] describe a system extracting keyframes for each scene. Their
"abstract" is called Mini-Video and consists of these keyframes plus audio data. The length of
the audio track is not shortened at all, as the intention is to keep a record of a lot of video and
audio data with as little memory space as possible. Therefore, this system is not regarded as one
abstracting the audio.
11
extraction based on the signicance of ob jects or words appearing in each scene
and on the structure of the video scene. The context of their work is easy usage of
digital video libraries, storing full-featured videos in content-specic segments. A
user's query to such a video library will extract such segments from videos, so-called
video paragraphs. These paragraphs are then skimmed, i.e. signicant images and words from a paragraph are extracted to produce a short synopsis for easy browsing
and retrieval.
We view a video skim as a moving-images abstract, although it consists of only
a few consecutive frames from a scene and is therefore similar to some of the still￾images abstracts. What makes a video skim dierent from a keyframe abstracting
system is that the amount of extracted frames is not constant but dependent on the
image and audio content of the scene, and, more important, not all scenes must be
used for an abstract thus eliminating scenes of low interest.
9 Conclusion
Video abstracting will gain increasing importance in the future when video on de￾mand services are started in metropolitan area networks. Automatic abstracting
services will be necessary in order to enable users to select the desired videos with
a high hit ratio.
We have presented several fundamental ideas for automatically abstracting dig￾ital videos based on video content characteristics, and a prototype system called
VAbstract based on these ideas. We have also presented a series of abstracting
experiments which have given us more insight into techniques of manual abstract
production. The biggest decit of our system is the missing audio analysis - impor￾tant pieces of the story are often contained in dialogs on the audio track. Currently, we are implementing the audio modules and title-extraction algorithms for improv￾ing our results. Future work will concentrate on gaining more knowledge about
abstracting other types of video genres and better usage of pre-dened structure
in videos. Also, we expect considerable runtime improvements for VAbstract as we
implement more ecient algorithms for cut detection, motion intensity and color
composition analysis. We are aware of the fact that our basic rules are empirical;
there is no formal proof of correctness. We can only evaluate them empirically, in￾cluding human views as our judges for quality. We intend to broaden our empirical
basis with more human users.
10 Acknowledgements
Many thanks to Helge Blohmer [Blo95] who developed and implemented a rst
prototype of the VAbstract system in C.
References
[ADHC94] F. Arman, R. Depommier, A. Hsu, and M.-Y. Chiu. Content-based
browsing of video sequences. In Proc. of ACM International Conference
on Multimedia, pages 97103, San Francisco, CA, October 1994.
[AHC94] F. Arman, A. Hsu, and M.-Y. Chiu. Image processing on encoded video
sequences. Multimedia Systems, 2(1):211219, 1994.
[Ain76] W.A. Ainsworth. Mechanisms of Speech Recognition. Pergamon, Ox￾ford, New York, Ontario, 1976.
12
[Blo95] Helge Blohmer. Video-abstracting. Master's thesis, University of
Mannheim, Germany, July 1995. (in German).
[dV96] Arjen P. de Vries. Television information ltering through speech recog￾nition. In B. Butscher, E. Moeller, and H. Pusch, editors, Interactive
Distributed Multimedia Systems and Services, number 1045 in Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 5969, Berlin, March 1996. Springer.
[EH93] B. Eppinger and E. Herter. Speech Processing (Sprachverarbeitung). Hauser, München, Wien, 1993. (in German).
[Ger96] Christoph Gerum. Automatic recognition of audio-cuts (Automatische
Erkennung von Audio-Cuts). Master's thesis, University of Mannheim,
Germany, January 1996. (in German).
[HJW95] A. Hampapur, R. Jain, and T.E. Weymouth. Production model based
digital video segmentation. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 1(1):9
46, 1995.
[Jai89] Anil K. Jain. Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing. Information
and System Science Series. Prentice Hall, Englewood Clis, New Jersey, 1989.
[LN91] P.H. Lindsay and D.A. Norman. Introduction into Psychology - Human
Information reception and processing (Einführung in die Psychologie
- Informationsaufnahme und -verabeitung beim Menschen). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1991. (in German).
[LS96] R. Lienhart and F. Stuber. Automatic text recognition in digital videos.
In Image and Video Processing IV, Proc. SPIE 2666-20, 1996.
[MB94] Don Murray and Anup Basu. Motion tracking with an active cam￾era. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intel ligence, 16(5):449459, May 1994.
[MCW92] M. Mills, J. Cohen, and Y.Y. Wong. A magnier tool for video data.
In Proc. of ACM Computer Human Interface (CHI), May 1992.
[PKL95] A.R. Pope, D. Ko, and D.G. Lowe. Introduction to vista programming
tools. Technical report, Department of Computer Science, University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, 1995.
[PL95] A.R. Pope and D.G. Lowe. A software environment for computer vision
research. Technical report, Department of Computer Science, University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, 1995.
[PTS82] C. Pryluck, C. Teddlie, and R. Sands. Meaning in lm/video: Order,
time and ambiguity. Journal of Broadcasting, 26:685695, 1982.
[Ror93] M.E. Rorvig. A method for automatically abstracting visual documents.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 44(1), 1993.
[SK95] M. Smith and T. Kanade. Video skimming for quick browsing based on
audio and image characterization. Computer science technical report,
Carnegie Mellon University, July 1995.
[SM83] G. Salton and M.J. McGill. Introduction to Modern Information Re￾trieval. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1983.
13
[TATH95] Y. Taniguchi, A. Akutsu, Y. Tonomura, and H. Hamada. An intu￾itive and ecient access interface to real-time incoming video based
on automatic indexing. In Proc. of ACM International Conference on
Multimedia '95, pages 2533, San Francisco, California, November 1995.
ACM press.
[TATS94] Y. Tonomura, A. Akutsu, Y. Taniguchi, and G. Suzuki. Structured
video computing. IEEE Multimedia Magazine, 1(3):3443, Fall 1994.
[Win82] Structure of music (Tiefenstruktur der Musik). Festschrift, Fritz
Winckel zum 75. Geburtrstag am 20.Juni 1982, Technische Universität
und Akademie der Künste, Berlin, 1982. (in German).
[YYWL95] M.M. Yeung, B.-L. Yeo, W. Wolf, and B. Liu. Video browsing us￾ing clustering and scene transitions on compressed sequences. In A.A.
Rodriguez and J. Maitan, editors, Multimedia Computing and Network￾ing 1995, volume 2417, pages 399414, San José, February 1995. Proc.
SPIE.
[ZKS93] H. Zhang, A. Kankanhalli, and S.W. Smoliar. Automatic partitioning
of full-motion video. Multimedia Systems, 1(1):1028, 1993.
[ZLSW95] H. Zhang, C.Y. Low, S.W. Smoliar, and J.H. Wu. Video parsing, re￾trieval and browsing: An integrated and content-based solution. In
Proc. of ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pages 1524,
San Francisco, California, November 1995. ACM press.
[ZMM95] R. Zabih, J. Miller, and K. Mai. A feature-based algorithm for detecting
and classifying scene breaks. In Proc. of ACM International Conference
on Multimedia, pages 189200, San Francisco, CA, November 1995.
[ZSW95] H. Zhang, S.W. Smoliar, and J.H. Wu. Content-based video browsing
tools. In A.A. Rodriguez and J. Maitan, editors, Multimedia Computing
and Networking 1995, volume 2417, pages 389398, San José, February
1995. Proc. SPIE.
14
