Friendship and solidarity

Abstract
This article explores a particular connection between friendship and social solidarity and seeks to contribute to understanding the societal significance of non-institutionalised relationships. Commonly the benefits of friendship are assumed to accrue to friends only. But this is only part of the story. Friendship, as instantiation of intimacy and site of moral learning, is conducive to solidarity understood as felt concern for unknown others. That potentiality rests on a specific characteristic: friendship’s loose institutional anchorage. Beginning with an explanation of friendship’s institutional deficit, the article elaborates Durkheim’s ‘positive solidarity’ juxtaposed with Honneth’s recent take on solidarity. It then discusses the contribution (partial) personal relationships make to (impartial) morality, before turning to the specifics of moral learning in friendship. Finally, the article argues that although undesirable as social organising principle, friendship’s institutional deficit renders it conducive to the relational acquisition of a comprehensive understanding of solidarity.
In this article I am concerned with dyadic friendship rather than networks or personal communities. I am interested in modalities of intimacy that strictly speaking pertain only to the dyad. I endeavour to elaborate the connections between the small world of intimacy to social solidarity rather than the socially generative dynamics of various group solidarities. When compared to the latter, social-theoretical work on intimate friendship is scarce. As Simmel has suggested and others have confirmed, the dyad is structurally irreducible, and cannot be simply ‘concatenated’ and left intact (Martin, 2009: 27). Thus, unlike any larger social formation the dyad exists under the ever-present threat of its own demise: ‘for its life, it needs both [actors], but for its death only one’ (Simmel 1950: 124, original emphasis). Lacking ‘a structure that goes beyond itself’, it exists by way of an unmediated (and thus rather fragile) intersubjectivity. This immediacy is no less than the very precondition for intimacy (Simmel, 1950: 126). Intimate friendship is the most ‘immediate’ in Simmel’s sense because it is the least institutionalised of personal relationships. It is characterised by symmetrical power relations and strict mutuality (Martin 2009: 12, 26-7), neither of which pertain in communities, networks and other group solidarities. None of this negates the possibility that socially generative intimacy can develop in larger groups. It is simply to point out that intimacy may develop in larger social formations insofar as intimate dyads are embedded in them.1 Add to this the scarcity of sociological research and especially conceptual work on intimate friendship, which hardly correlates to the relationship’s significance in people’s lives. Again it is Simmel (1993, p. 348) who calls out to us: ‘rather than limit the sociological gaze to the great collective entities’, we must ‘turn to those finer, more ephemeral relationships…that unfold between person and person…on which, after all, the inner vitality and solidity of our existence depend’. There are good reasons, then, to continue to bring the small world of one-on-one friendship (back) into the fold of sociological theory.
Few would disagree with Simmel’s conviction that personal relationships, and intimate friendships in particular, lend vitality to life. Friendship, so the common view, is good for us. Panegyrics praising its virtues comprise a substantial part of the western philosophical canon. Aristotle’s conviction that ‘without friends, no one would choose to live, even if he possessed all other goods’ (2012, p. 163) has been lent some credence by the human and social sciences. Quality of life studies, for instance, have time and again shown the importance of friendship to subjective well-being, life satisfaction and happiness (Demir et al., 2014; Sirgy, 2012). Survey research has confirmed that friendship is a significant source of meaning (Pew Research Center, 2018), and considered a panacea for loneliness across the life course (Nicolaisen and Thorsen, 2017) recommended to men especially since gendered norms may be reflected in men’s social and emotional withdrawal (Garfield, 2015; Greif, 2009; Kimmel, 2004). On this view, intimate friendship has subjective benefits accruing to friends and most obviously to friends only. Hence, it also attracts the suspicions of political theorists.
For political thinkers in the republican and liberal democratic traditions, intimate friendship cannot deliver political integration. Again Aristotle looms large. Whether directly deployed or resonant heuristic background, his philia politike is shaped to make the point that only ‘political’ or ‘civic’ friendship can hold societies together, while intimate friendship, seen as an indicator of modern individualism, is insignificant at best (Mallory, 2012; Schwarzenbach, 2010; G. M. Smith, 2011; critically, Digeser, 2016). Such accounts, rather than attempting to come to grips with the actual side-by-side of the range of relationships, pit friendship’s private and public variants against one another. In this conceptual zero-sum game, intimate friendship, now devalued, finds itself hermetically sealed in a sphere of its own, unable to partake of, or contribute to, anything notionally ‘public’ (Blatterer, 2018, 2019).
Perhaps theorists who seek to lift Aristotle’s concept from the Athenian ‘citizen-state’ (Cartledge, 2016) and to impose it on modern contexts expect too much of non-contractual relationships such as friendship, which although ‘morally significant…are so for reasons and in ways that make them a poor template for the special obligations thought to exist among fellow citizens’ (Wellman, 2001, p. 223). For Preston King (2007), the moral examples set in friendships ‘indirectly impact society as a whole’; ‘it is a mistake’, therefore, ‘to see dyadic friendship, the most intimate of friendship forms, as devoid of a wider political impact’ (2007, p. 142). Now another possibility emerges: perhaps the reasons for friendship’s moral significance lie in a most unlikely place, namely in the very fact that friendship is private and personal, intimate and non-contractual?
It is this possibility I seek to clarify within certain constraints. I do not deal with the effects of social context on friendship, for example with why and how democracy is more conducive to friendship formation than autocracy (Shklar, 1998). Neither can I, for all their importance, discuss the ‘hidden solidarities’ of personal communities which have been thought of as a kind of ‘social glue’ (Pahl, 1998; Spencer, 2006; Wilkinson, 2019) or the structural advantages of friendship as a ‘flexible’ relationship especially suited to late-modern times (Allan, 2008). I am specifically interested in the contribution that friendship as a specific modality of intimacy may make to the affective basis of social solidarity, to what Emile Durkheim (2013) called ‘positive solidarity’ and which with the aid of Axel Honneth (2017) can be thought of as a substantive concern for unknown others.
The connection between friendship and solidarity I draw is not a straightforward one. The solidarities of personal relationships cannot – and ought not – be generalised to societal bonds. Neither am I arguing that there is a direct transfer of particularistic to generalised trust (see Freitag & Traunmüller, 2009). The connection I seek to make is more indirect still. All affectionate relationships give concrete expression to solidarity but do so within the context of the personal, private and intimate domains, that is, according to the normative demands of partiality. What bridges partiality and impartiality (not to be conflated with impersonality) is an intersubjective learning process that for all its specific situatedness in personal life gives vital impetus to public life. For it is in private and personal life that we learn the comprehensive meaning of ‘the moral point of view’ as reciprocity (Williams, 1981), as the capacity to extend ourselves generously to others without which it is difficult to imagine, let alone enact, the ‘for each other’ that characterises social solidarity (Honneth, 2017). Here we learn how to build strong relationships with close others, and this, in turn, enables us to acquire a comprehensive – both understood and felt – understanding of solidarity.
None of this is new to moral philosophers who have problematised the public/private division drawn between partiality and impartiality (e.g. Friedman, 1993; Gilligan, 1993; Honneth, 2007a; Honneth & Rössler, 2008; Stocker, 1976; Velleman, 1999; Williams, 1981). What I seek to bring to the debate is the specific contribution of intimate friendship to solidarity viewed through a sociological lens. I home in on a singular characteristic with decisive consequences: private, intimate, non-contractual and seemingly purposeless beyond itself, friendship is the least institutionalised and thus ‘integrated’ of personal relationships. This turns out to be a strength. Rather than indicating the sequestration of friendship in a domain of its own with scant societal significance, it renders the relationship particularly conducive to the kind of experiential moral learning without which solidary concern for strangers lacks affective hermeneutic grounding. To elaborate this argument I begin by identifying some typical characteristics of friendship as intimate relationship and briefly explain what I call its institutional deficit. I then turn to Durkheim’s notion of ‘positive solidarity’ and cast it against Honneth’s recent reflections in The Idea of Socialism (2017). This is followed by a discussion of the link between (partial) personal relationships and (impartial) morality before attending to moral learning in friendship and its relationship to solidarity.

Friendship’s intimacy and institutional deficit
Intimacy, as used here, goes beyond feelings and physical closeness; it denotes the freely chosen, relational instantiation of trust, respect and justice underpinned by care and affection (Alberoni, 2016; Honneth, 2007a; Markus, 2010a; Rawlins, 1992). In this normative sense, intimacy separates friends from ‘friendly relations’ (Kurth, 1970) among acquaintances whose relationship balances on discretion and from those between colleagues and comrades primarily orientated to exogenous objectives such as a task or ‘cause’ (Kracauer, 2011; Simmel, 1906). This does not mean that friendly relations cannot develop into friendships, but simply indicates that colleagues, comrades and acquaintances are replaceable in a specific sense, while intimates are not. Friendship thus exists for its own sake insofar as it is orientated to a concrete other as person qua person (Alberoni, 2016; Suttles, 1970). By extension, while friends may be ‘useful’ to each other, they do not use each other as means to a given end (Allan, 1979, p. 43). We might, as does John Rundell (2019, p. 5) in his reflection on Kant and friendship, think here of ‘a purposiveness without purpose, that is, a purposiveness with neither functional or strategic intent’. That this is a defining element of modern intimacy was ventured by Adorno: ‘For tenderness between people’, he wrote, ‘is nothing other than the awareness of the possibility of relations without purpose’ (2005, p. 41).
To say that friendship is an instantiation of intimacy is meant to indicate that in friendship intimacy is more than a raft of appealable norms. Friendship goes beyond rule following and thus does not attract sanctions when norms are breached. Take justice, for example. Its non-appealable quality is already reflected in Aristotle’s comment ‘when people have friends they have no need of justice’ (2012, p. 164; see also Derrida, 2005). In ‘love’, on the other hand, intimacy is comprised of norms that are appealable when breached, and they are, in the last instance appealable in a court of law.2 In couple relationships, intimacy finds formal support, but also cultural and professional support in the self-help genre as well as marriage and relationship counselling (Bellah et al., 2007; Illouz, 2008). Moreover, what goes by the name of ‘love’ all too often includes the most egregious acts. For Francesco Alberoni, therefore, ‘the register of justice is not love – it is friendship’ (2016, p. 21). On that view, friendship is an instantiation of (sphere-specific) justice; it is justice just as it is trust, is respect, is care.3 Should friendship-as-justice turn unjust, trust to distrust, respect to disrespect, no institutional remedies and supports are available. While a given friendship may be fraught, difficulties, conflicts and relationship dissolution occur on normative premises that differ distinctly from those that operate in strongly institutionalised personal relationships. These differences should also serve to caution against an idealising view of friendship because ‘institutional openness’ also translates into considerable ambiguities concerning how difficulties might be dealt with (Eramian & Mallory, 2020; Smart et al., 2012).
Modern, intimate friendship is not institutionalised in ritual as charted in a now classic anthropological literature concerned with institutionalised friendships (Brain, 1976; Cohen, 1961). Owing to incremental de-institutionalisation during its modern development (Kon, 1979; Markus, 2010b), residual institutional elements are mainly about typical expectations that orient (rather than determine) interactions; friendship figures as a social representation (Bidart, 1997) that renders the relationship legible in the culture rather than constituting a full-fledged institution comprised of appealable norms. It is in this sense that Robert Paine (1974, p. 128) calls friendship an ‘institutionalized non-institution’. Moreover, friendship concerns persons beyond their public personas, offices, functions and statuses (Silver, 1996). The lack of institutional, and thus societal, anchorage is manifest in a lack of legal rights and obligations accruing to friends (Goodrich, 2003; Leib, 2011). And neither can it claim the kind of public recognition afforded parent–child relationships or erotic love which comes replete with therapeutic institutions and commodified cultural representations (Allan, 1979; Illouz, 1997, 2008, 2012; Kaufmann, 2009; Luhmann, 2010; Silver, 1996; Swidler, 2001).
The void left by this ‘institutional deficit’ puts a premium on intimacy (Blatterer, 2013); it is the fulcrum on which all interactional contingencies balance and without which it makes no sense to speak of intimate friendship. While partaking of cultural representations that give meaning to the typical interactional repertoire we understand by ‘friendship’, the relationship is made, lived and unmade by friends to the greatest possible degree of autonomy. Its institutional deficit renders friendship the ‘freest’ of all human associations, so that the constitution of selves (Cocking & Kennett, 1998) takes place in the context of the greatest possible degree of relational autonomy.4 This is significant. For, if it is the case that in relationships of affection ‘we learn once and for all what it means to concern ourselves with someone else’s well-being’ (Honneth, 2007b, p. 172), such moral learning takes place under the specific conditions of friendship’s institutional deficit, that is, not despite its loose societal anchorage but because of it. I begin my elaboration of that argument with a discussion of Durkheim’s ‘positive solidarity’.

Positive solidarity as concern for unknown others
Having roots in Roman Law as a form of liability, it is only from the end of the 18th century that solidarity begins to be used as a political and moral term (Bayertz, 1999). Resonant with Judeo-Christian brotherly love, its first iteration as a political demand is the French Revolution’s call for fraternity. Subsequent invocations remain closely tied to movements and parties struggling for political rights (Brunkhorst, 2005; Stjernø, 2005). That political provenance may be the main reason why solidarity has been a fairly neglected concept in political theory where political or civic friendship has stronger currency. For one, there is the aversion to sexist connotations by virtue of solidarity’s semantic relative ‘fraternity’, and there are concerns about partisan usage by the political left (Schwarzenbach, 2010). At the same time, social science interest has never entirely waned (e.g. Brunkhorst, 2005; Honneth, 2017; Stjernø, 2005; Wilde, 2013). In sociology in particular, solidarity is a staple concept owing to Durkheim’s attempt to come to grips with changing modes of social integration ushered in by a rapidly expanding division of labour. As part of that work, Durkheim reflects on the required affective basis of integration he calls ‘positive solidarity’.

Durkheim on positive solidarity
In The Division of Labor, Durkheim was explicitly concerned with moral integration under conditions of advanced societal differentiation, for which he chose the term ‘organic solidarity’. As he puts it, ‘above all we must determine the degree to which the solidarity…[the division of labour] produces contributes generally to the integration of society’, whereby solidarity is a ‘wholly moral phenomenon’ (2013, pp. 51–52). The tensions around the incomplete shift from mechanical to organic solidarity are much discussed and need not be restated here. What is of interest to this discussion is another, relatively neglected distinction. In his discussion of law – for him the empirical manifestation of solidarity – Durkheim distinguishes between negative and positive solidarity. He describes both mechanical and organic solidarity as types of ‘positive solidarity’ insofar as they are more or less integrative depending on the degree of societal differentiation. But he also uses the notions of negative and positive solidarity more narrowly, namely with reference to the operations of modern, restitutive law (p. 322). The distinction rests, in the first instance, on the difference between legally mediated relations that ‘link things directly to persons, but not persons with one another’ (p. 91). Although central to solidarity, these relationships are negative in the sense that while ‘disputes are forstalled, there is no active co-operation, no consensus’ (p. 92, original emphasis). An example Durkheim gives is property rights (‘real rights’). In the second instance, Durkheim suggests a necessary interrelatedness of negative (contractual) and positive (affective) solidarity. Only together can they result in social integration because negative solidarity on its own ‘is not a true solidarity’ (p. 94).
Positive solidarity comes into greater relief still when Durkheim states that ‘for a man to acknowledge that others have rights, not only as a matter of logic, but as one of daily living, he must have agreed to limit his own’ (2013, p. 94). Not satisfied with what is essentially a definition of negative liberal freedom, he goes on to say, ‘consequently this mutual limitation was only realizable in a spirit of understanding and harmony’ (p. 94). But what, he asks, drives ‘these reciprocal sacrifices’? The answer is worth reproducing at some length:
It is customary to distinguish carefully between justice and charity, that is, the mere respect of others’ rights, from every act that goes beyond that purely negative virtue. In both these kinds of practices may be seen two independent strata of ethics: justice, by itself, might constitute its basic foundation; charity might be its crowning glory. The distinction is such a radical one that, according to the protagonists of a certain kind of ethics, justice alone is needful for the smooth functioning of social life.5 Altruism is scarcely more than a private virtue, which it is laudable for the individual to pursue, but which society can very well do without. Many even view its intervention in public life with some disquiet.…In reality, for men to acknowledge and mutually guarantee the rights of one another, they must first have a mutual liking, and have some reason that makes them cling to one another and to the single society of which they form a part. Justice is filled with charity, or to employ once more our expression, negative solidarity is only the emanation of another solidarity that is positive in nature: it is the repercussion of social feelings in the sphere of ‘real’ rights which come from a different source. Thus there is nothing specific about justice, but it is the necessary accompaniment to every kind of solidarity. (pp. 95–96, my emphases)
Although using the terminology differently, Durkheim’s is an early formulation of Habermas’s much-commented upon dictum ‘[j]ustice…requires solidarity as its reverse side’ (1989, p. 244).6 Inextricable from one another, positive solidarity needs justice to hold society together via law, the ‘visible symbol’ of solidarity (Durkheim, 2013, p. 52). Modern law, as the institutional and formalised interpretation of collectively contested norms of justice, receives its integrative force neither merely by threat of legitimate violence, nor from a sense of duty alone, nor from a longing for peace (pp. 94–95), but from ‘social feelings’. Ever defensive of society as the origin of meaning-constitutive and regulative social facts, for Durkheim, positive solidarity is more than ‘the other of justice’. As its necessary condition, it refers to those residual sediments of the collective consciousness that despite processes of social differentiation have remained the stuff of human bonds even in those societies whose morality has been described as ‘postconventional’, grounded in universalisable, formal principles of justice (Kohlberg, 1981) – in societies, that is, that are bereft of a collective consciousness with any claim to a meaning-constitutive totality.
It is for good reasons, then, that from a legal perspective, Durkheim’s ‘positive solidarity exists essentially as a mystery’ (Greenhouse, 2011, p. 176). For the ‘mystery’ of shared, binding sentiments resists formal integration into cognitive conceptions of justice. This is not the place to seek to reconcile the tensions. It suffices to note positive solidarity as constituting an affective social fact whose shape has been variously conceptualised: in Aristotle’s philia politike in the context of Athenian democracy and its contemporary iterations in civic or political friendship; the notion of ‘sympathy’ as integrative moral sentiment in commercial society (Silver, 1990; Smith, 2006); Hegel’s ‘love’ tempering Kantian justice (Honneth, 2007a); various forms of patriotism, from veneration of the patrie and Jacobin lip-service to fraternity, to nationalist-fascist ‘blood and soil’ ideology and its categorical negation in ‘constitutional patriotism’ (Habermas, 1996; Muller, 2007; Schama, 1989); communitarianism and the ethic of care (Gilligan, 1993; Sen, 1999); ‘the sense of justice’ with its negative evidence guilt and shame (Rawls, 1963); those ‘needs of strangers’ that go beyond the mere provision of essentials to sustain life (Ignatieff, 1984); advocacy for a public life that beyond turning on civility turns on decency (Margalit, 1996; Markus, 2001); the need for ‘resonance’ with self and others as panacea for alienation and reification (Rosa, 2019); a felt, intentional mutuality that, while non-legislable, can flourish only when anchored in democratic participation in all spheres of life (Honneth, 2017). Among these conceptions, Honneth’s approach is especially helpful, not least because it limits the reach and role of Durkheim’s positive solidarity.

Honneth: Solidarity as mutual concern
In The Idea of Socialism, Honneth seeks to reconcile ‘individual freedom and solidarity’ understood as a ‘for each other’ that, rather than limiting our freedom, is the precondition for self-determination in polity, economy and personal life (2017, pp. 20, 19).7 It can only be attained on the basis of equal participation requiring the ongoing deconstruction of barriers to the free communication of needs. What differentiates this conception from liberal conceptions that perceive solidarity as a secondary consequence of the enactment of private freedom or market transactions is its intentionality. Taking his lead from Daniel Brudney (2014), Honneth argues that subjects can only act for each other if their aims rather than merely ‘overlapping’ are ‘intertwined’ in the pursuit of common purposes. In a later clarification Honneth arrives at two further elements of solidarity: awareness of interdependencies including the mutuality of well-being (derived from Durkheim) and the rejection of affection as basis for solidarity (2019, p. 702). The latter particularly needs discussing.
When imagining a socialist society, Honneth is not imagining a friendly society. On this he is unequivocal, stating that he ‘didn’t want to make solidarity closer to what is normally called friendship. I never wanted to have a picture of…a society of members who love each other or who have positive emotional relations to each other’. Honneth jettisons ‘emotional attitudes like altruism’, but also ‘fraternity’ and any ‘reference to positive emotional attitudes like those in friendships and love relationships’; they are dissolved in the sufficient condition for solidarity: the mutual awareness of interdependencies including each other’s well-being (2019, pp. 702–703). Honneth does not repudiate the bonding significance of emotions per se; his is not a cognitivist account. Rather, Honneth permits only those emotions to enter into his conception of solidarity that give appropriate expression to a ‘for each other’ in the context of a society of strangers where anonymity and difference rather than communal familiarity and similarity characterise social experience. The term he uses is ‘concern’ (Anteilnahme) which for Brudney – who finds references to the notion in the early Marx and as ‘an underground current’ in Rawls – is a fitting descriptor of an attitude that, although a form of love in the broadest sense, lends itself to solidary feelings whose specific object is ‘unknown others’ (2014, pp. 450, 461). The normative line to be drawn around the concept is that beyond which feelings of belonging to a cultural community trump the rule of law. The normative remit it articulates is that ‘members of society can satisfy the needs they share with all others – physical and emotional intimacy, economic independence and political self-determination – by relying on the sympathy and support of their partners in interaction’ (Honneth, 2017, pp. 107–108).
Read alongside Honneth, Durkheim’s positive solidarity takes on sharper contours: unlike Durkheim, Honneth insists on a concept of solidarity that rejects any reference to fraternity, friendship, altruism or charity; like Durkheim, Honneth understands the necessary basis of social integration in mutual concern and interdependencies that, more than merely functional, describe an intentional we-orientation; and like Durkheim, Honneth seeks to account for societal differentiation. What Honneth adds to Durkheim’s vision is an emphasis on shared goals and purposes hammered out in democratic will formation; and (like Habermas) he charges ‘the democratic public sphere, occupied by deliberating citizens’ with ‘integrative steering’ of functionally differentiated spheres of action (2017, pp. 97, 96). Positive solidarity filtered through Honneth’s conception is socially integrative because it constitutes the collective-affective basis – but not the organising principle – of rationally organised, highly differentiated legal communities.
To reiterate, positive solidarity denotes no simple generalisation of fraternity nor is it a wall-erecting appeal to isolationism, cultural patriotism and nationalism. On the other hand, a society principally held together by negative solidarity is a society in which legal subjects are subjected to reifying juridification (Habermas, 1981, pp. 356–373), something appeals to positive solidarity seek to forestall At the same time, any discussion of solidarity as ‘social feelings’ cannot pass over questions about their motivations in the full and discomfiting knowledge that such feelings can – and do – turn antidemocratic. What the substantive content of positive solidarity is or ought to be – whether a republican or constitutional patriotism, an enlightened cosmopolitanism or some other form of generalisable sentiment – is up for debate (see Nussbaum, 1996). We can assume, however, that positive solidarity requires, at minimum, a felt concern for unknown (and we might add ‘unlike’) others. The capacity for such concern is learnt in relations with concrete, loved others because solidarity is more than an abstract notion based on abstract principles that need only be operationalised as required.

Moral learning, friendship and solidarity
Owing to philosophers and social theorists who, from about the 1980s, turned specifically to the position of personal relationships vis-à-vis impartial morality, today relations between universal and particular normative demands are more comprehensively understood as contradictory and complimentary, mutually limiting as well as supportive. While the tensions may not be resolved, the hierarchical ordering of moral values, whereby public impartiality simply trumps the partialities of private life, has been challenged by analyses that assign different moral content to different contexts, while acknowledging the intertwinement of universal principles of justice, duty and respect and moralities underpinning ethics of care and affection (Gilligan, 1993; Honneth, 2007a, 2007b; Honneth & Rössler, 2008; LaFollette, 1996; Velleman, 1999; Williams, 1981).
The central social-theoretical insight on which these perspectives are built is that morality cannot be learnt by way of solitary contemplation and interiorisation of abstract principles, since ‘it makes absolutely no sense to talk about ethical and moral conduct separately from relations of human beings to each other’ (Adorno, 2014, p. 19). Whether conceived of as everyday ‘moralising discourse’ (Luckmann, 2002) or as impartial universal principles underpinning the rule of law, morality is intersubjectively constituted and socially constructed. It is in this sense that Luckmann, with reference to Schutz, calls ‘the reciprocity of perspectives’ a ‘universal source of morality’ (2002, p. 21, original emphases), that G.H. Mead (1934) saw the ‘moral constitution of selves’ (Abbott, 2020) the outcome of dynamic processes between I, Me and generalised other and that Garfinkel situated the moral order in the filigree of ‘the world of daily life known in common with others and with others taken for granted (1967, p. 35).
Of particular interest here is the role personal relationships play in the acquisition of a moral sense that reaches beyond the horizon of the private sphere. For Hugh LaFollette (1996), for instance, moral learning is one bridge across the divide connecting the seemingly irreconcilable requirements of partiality and impartiality. He argues that it is in personal relationships that we learn about empathy without which we cannot develop moral selves. Drawing on Aristotle’s conception of virtue-friendship, for LaFollette close relationships are intimate only to the extent that they are moral. Although not impossible among immoral persons, at the very least such relationships ‘are in jeopardy’ (p. 195; see also Alberoni, 2016). Taking issue with a Kantian approach that reduces moral judgement to legalistically construed rules, he charges that approach with an inability to fathom persons' moral development and counters: ‘Morality…is not some mysterious and inexplicable practice of abstract moral contemplation, but a complex habit’. These ‘moral habits’ are learnt intersubjectively, and in particular in those close personal relationships without which ‘[i]t is difficult to imagine’ how the principles of impartial morality and the motivations to act accordingly can be apprehended in the first place (p. 206). In sum, according to LaFollette, the ‘[e]xperience and involvement in such relationships enhance our interest in and sympathy for the plight of others’ (p. 211). This is not to resolve the tensions characterising relations between impartial morality and the moral fabric of partial, personal relationships; but it does chart the morally generative potentials of the latter. Honneth concurs. For on that view, ‘it would be absurd, counter-intuitive in the strongest sense’, he writes, ‘to exclude precisely those actions from the realm of morality that represent for us…morality’s most obvious illustrative material. It is precisely from acts of partiality that we learn once and for all what it means to concern ourselves with someone else’s well-being’ (2007b, p. 172) – even, that is, if that ‘someone else’ is a stranger. Here, intimate friendship, not least on account of its institutional deficit, plays a particularly vital role.

Friendship’s moral significance
Martha Nussbaum reminds us that experiential moral learning ‘takes place in the experience of the concrete’, friendship included: ‘Trusting the guidance of a friend and allowing one’s feelings to be engaged with that other person’s life and choices, one learns to see aspects of the world that one had previously missed’ (1992, p. 44). To illustrate, take Henry Miller’s reflection on his encounters with a friend:
To come into his presence gave me the sensation of being undressed, or rather peeled, for it was much more than mere nakedness which he demanded of the person he was talking to. […]
Hamilton altered me profoundly, as only a rare book, a rare personality, a rare experience, can alter one. For the first time in my life I understood what it was to experience a vital friendship and yet not to feel enslaved or attached because of the experience. (Miller, 1961, pp. 148–149)
Describing the profound personal changes effected by his intimate friendship with Hamilton, Miller intimates what is involved: a preparedness, built on trust, to be vulnerable, to being emotionally, psychologically ‘undressed’, so that he could exercise his capacity to bring down his defences. David Velleman (1999) has written about such voluntary defencelessness as a central element not only of love but, although learnt in affectionate relationships, as vital to empathy and respect for non-intimates even if vulnerability vis-à-vis strangers requires more circumspection. An open self, receptive to another, invites new insights, a change of values, even moral epiphanies, revelations that, however momentary, restructure our attitudes, and tint the lens through which we perceive ourselves and others with a different, more translucent hue.
For a young Siegfried Kracauer, who was yet to find out how difficult his long and intimate friendships with Ernst Bloch and especially T.W. Adorno were to become (Später, 2020), the mutual building of selves is a distinguishing element of friendship: ‘However close the acquaintance might be situated: as long as he is only an acquaintance, he does not participate in the construction of our self, does not give continuous nourishment to the imagination, and his image does not live in us as invisible companion on our path’. In friendship, on the other hand, the ‘image of the other rests in his [the friend’s] soul’ (2011, pp. 38, 55); it is a guiding image, a reference point for our moral compass, especially, though not exclusively, in times of self-doubt. We calibrate our moral sense by way of friendship’s mutuality. Similarly, Marilyn Friedman refers to the friend as ‘moral witness’. Friends witness each other’s moral perspectives, permitting the ‘vicarious participation in the very experience of moral alternatives’ (1993, p. 199).
Yet, moral learning is not simply about the acquisition of what counts for the right and the good, about a kind of gleaning of how to ‘do moral’. The diminished need for discretion in friendship enables an unselfconscious opening up that can lead to moral self-calibration. Emerson wrote that in the company of our friend, we ‘may think aloud’ (Emerson cited in Vernon, 2006, pp. 157–158). Thinking aloud is conducive to learning because it is risky, and it is risky because presumably most of us at times think the unthinkable. Friendship’s intimacy allows us to speak the unspeakable, to say what not only from the standpoint of public morality and ‘community sentiment’, but even – and perhaps especially – against our own better judgement, may well be highly problematic, even indecent. Intimate friends will make allowances because they recognise each other’s idiosyncrasies which include, aside from everything we might find laudable, fallibilities, errors and lapses in judgement.
Not only are deviations from moral convention both enabled by and indicative of personal trust and freedom of action (Luhmann, 2014, pp. 47–59; Suttles, 1970), they give substantive meaning to Friedman’s (1993, p. 205) point that friends value each other for their ‘whole particularity’. Whether commensurate or incommensurate with morality writ large, friends are willing to offer glimpses not only of their private but at times even their secret lives because they can trust that the friend’s interpretation of unmanaged self-presentations is weighed up against a fuller understanding of who they are based on a shared history. That is not say that friendship is therefore easier to negotiate than other bonds of affection. Far from it. As in all close bonds, a shared history can also lead to misunderstandings, misinterpretations, difficulties (Smart et al., 2012). It is simply to indicate that in friendship empathy is both specific and unspecific; it is oriented to the whole complexity of the other even if it can never be fully grasped; it denotes friendship’s generosity, crucial to learning to respond empathically not only to intimates but to unknown others. For LaFollette, any close personal relationship seems to suffice for the development of an ‘inclination to generalize [empathy] to others’ because they widen ‘our moral horizons’ (1996, p. 208). I suggest this needs to be qualified. What is required is intimacy, that is, the self-chosen realisation of trust, respect and equality in the context of care and affection. And it is on those grounds that friendship especially, as non-institutionalisd instantiation of intimacy, offers the potential for experiential moral learning.
That potentiality of friendship is apparent from the earliest part of the life course. Children’s friendships are to be noted here, not least because ‘the family’ has overwhelmingly come to be seen as singularly decisive concerning children’s moral and social development. There is, today, a long list of critiques of the family both as a concept and concerning its idealised status in socialisation theories that does not need to be addressed here. It suffices to select one crucial aspect: even a cursory glance at children’s friendships shows that they are the first extra-familial relationships in which a kind of morality is constructed that goes beyond duty and obligation and ‘contain[s] principles of solidarity and care’ (Keller & Edelstein, 1991, p. 256). Crucially, they are the first intimate relationships constructed on self-generated, that is, ‘equal’, terms. This is in contradistinction to adult–child bonds where respect is unilaterally demanded (Piaget, 1932: 44) so that moral learning, at least for a time, takes place in a context of parental ‘hegemony’ and child obedience to authority (cf. Duveen, 2013). Grounded in a fundamental equality, experiences of friendship especially ‘are likely to form the basis of children’s acquisition of concepts such as justice and courage or care’ (Bukowski et al., 1996, p. 258). Already between children, then, friendship provides ‘increasingly structured opportunities for the acquisition of practices of cooperation within a relationship of equality’ (Keller & Edelstein, 1991, p. 255), enabling us from the early years to experience the lineaments of care and affection vital to the development of a moral sense (Johansson, 2008; Scramaglia, 2000; Walker et al., 2016) as the affective basis for the cognitive apprehension of justice and fairness (Habermas, 1989; Kohlberg, 1981).
Even if we account for the ‘co-primacy’ of cognition and affective moral motivations (Gibbs, 2014), experiential moral learning is skewed to the emotions to the extent that it does not result from rule following, but accrues from feelings of profound mutual respect instantiated in encounters with a concrete other. While none of this is in principle alien to other interpersonal bonds, the typical social constitution of intimate friendship appears to make it particularly conducive to such learning. Of course, it can only be realisable to the extent that a given relationship offers that realisation to friends. But in principle at least, intimate friendship provides optimal conditions for moral learning because here intimacy is self-generated by friends to the greatest possible degree. This is a central practical implication of friendship’s institutional deficit. It enables from an early age the concrete actualisation of intimacy and thus a comprehensive understanding of solidarity as felt concern for unknown others.

Conclusion
The finest legal instruments, the most well-crafted constitution, the best-coordinated democratic will formation cannot do without the substantive concern for strangers in which it must be grounded. Above, the emphasis was on concern rather than friendship because, as history has shown, ties of affection are all too easily co-opted to conjure foundations in essentialised commonalities. They may foster cohesion among some for each other and at the same time foment indifference, intolerance, animosity and hatred for yet others. In such terms, solidarity is, among other things, not about inward-looking affection, but an empathetic extension to the needs of strangers. It goes beyond civility and is nourished by a fundamental decency (Margalit, 1996; Markus, 2001).
I have suggested that to say that there is no place for affection as a principle of social integration – that elevated to the rank of social organising principle it in fact threatens public cohesion – is not to say that interpersonal ties of affection do not matter to public life, to solidarity. Because we are mostly able to intuitively distinguish between intimate friends and friendly relations, between the mutual affections and respect we hold for those we are closest to, as well as the need for discretion we exercise with more distant others, the experience of friendship does not simply translate into an undifferentiated extension of a bare-all intimacy to everyone. Here too closeness and distance need negotiating. However, as an instantiation of trust, respect and justice, intimate friendship provides an experiential basis for the learning of the substantive meaning of morality without which the very notion of concern for others is bound to ring hollow. I have suggested that friendship’s institutional deficit is a decisive element conducive to that potentiality.
On the view offered here, friendship offers more than what is commonly said to be its advantages, though boon to subjective wellbeing it no doubt is. Friendship may help us understand the meaning and evaluate thequality of solidarity not only cognitively and abstractly but emotionally and concretely – comprehensively. Beyond its contribution to friends, then, friendship’s intimacy, perhaps counterintuitively, also bridges the divide between the private and public domains in societies of strangers. If so, this ought to give pause concerning the integrative strength of social relationships that elude unproblematic categorisation as ‘institution’. Such reflection is especially warranted in sociology. For at least since Durkheim, the moral and the institutional are treated as virtually synonymous while at the same time moral significances are elaborated, worked out, lived in the extraordinary ‘just so’ of everyday life, in relationships whose only anchorage is another as other.

Acknowledgement
The author would like to thank Norbert Ebert and Sveva Magaraggia, as well as the reviewers, for their helpful comments on an earlier draft.
Declaration of conflicting interestsThe author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.