Intergroup friendship: A reflective spotlight

Abstract
Growing empirical evidence supports the positive contribution of cross-group friendship to intergroup attitudes, as well as to individuals' personal development. However, developing cross-group friendships may be challenging depending on individuals' respective group identities; namely, their ethnicity, gender, race, and sexual orientation identities. This paper considers how psychological factors related to these group identities contribute to cross-group friendship. Research on individuals' experiences of cross-group interactions across different contexts (first encounters; interacting with friends) has found that these interactions can be challenging. Most explanations of these challenges have focused either directly or indirectly on issues related to prejudice. It is suggested here that another important but neglected perspective for understanding intergroup friendship concerns individuals' awareness and responsiveness to differences in privileges and opportunities associated with their own and their friend's group-related identities. The implications are discussed in the context of friendship values and relationship qualities in intergroup friendship.

1 INTRODUCTION
Intergroup friendship merits much more attention than it has received in the literature on close relationships. Much social psychological research on intergroup relations has focused on understanding and trying to improve how people think and feel about individuals from other social groups, given past and/or current intergroup conflict or oppression. Evidence supports the key role of cross-group friendship in contributing to improved intergroup relations (Page-Gould et al., 2010; Pettigrew, 1997, 1998). There is, however, strong evidence of homophily, namely friendships formed with individuals who share one's group identities (Fehr & Harasymchuk, 2022; see also McPherson et al., 2001). Forming and maintaining friendships with others exclusively or largely from one's social group(s) limits individuals' social environments, affecting both attitudes and interactions (McPherson et al., 2001). Intergroup friendships, defined as friendship between individuals from different social groups (Grütter & Tropp, 2019) have the potential for positive social change. Understanding the development of cross-group friendship spans the fields of close relationships and intergroup relations. Psychological dimensions related to group-identities and the nature of intergroup relations contribute to friendship values, friendship potential, and the relationship qualities of friendship. This paper spotlights selected issues and illustrative research findings of how group-related identities contribute to cross-group friendship.

Much psychological research on intergroup friendship concerns interracial and interethnic friendship. As dimensions of race and ethnicity are associated with evidence of strong same-group(s) friendship preferences (Fehr & Harasymchuk, 2022; McPherson et al., 2001) and as such, understanding what leads individuals to expand their social network to develop cross-group friendships is important. In Davies et al.'s (2011) meta-analysis of the relation between cross-group friendship and intergroup attitudes, nearly 60% of the samples involved interethnic or interracial friendship (see table 4, p. 338). Fehr and Harasymchuk (2022) observed that cross-race friendship has received by far the most empirical attention. Over the past two decades, research on cross-group dyadic interaction has focused on interracial interactions and their implications for developing friendship.

Another important and growing area of research on cross-group friendship concerns gender diversity and sexual orientation. A preference for homophily is evident on these dimensions (Fehr & Harasymchuk, 2022). It is important therefore to examine how these social identities and their intersections contribute to the likelihood and qualities of cross-group friendship (e.g., Baiocco et al., 2014; Galupo, 2009; Galupo & Gonzalez, 2013), especially given evidence of interpersonal behavior (e.g., microaggressions) which make establishing cross-group friendships more difficult (Nadal, 2019).

Davies et al. (2011) used a meta-analytic approach to examine the relation between various measures of cross-group friendship and intergroup attitudes. When comparing different friendship indicators, they found that the strongest effect size providing evidence for a positive relation between cross-group friendship and intergroup attitudes occurred on a combined measure of two indicators that assessed individuals' active, ongoing behavioral involvement in their cross-group friendships; namely, spending time together and self-disclosure (Davies et al., 2011). Cross-group friendship can be a significant contributor to positive intergroup relations, particularly if it is characterized by specific behavioral qualities, such as self-disclosure. How do these positive qualities develop in these friendships, particularly between individuals whose respective group status(es) reflect group interaction histories of conflict or oppression? Considering its potential not only for facilitating and improving intergroup relations but also as contributing to individuals' personal development (Dys-Steenbergen et al., 2016; Paolini et al., 2016), cross-group friendship is an important domain of inquiry.



2 FRIENDSHIP: DEFINING FEATURES AND EXPECTATIONS
Friendship has been defined as a “voluntary, personal relationship typically providing intimacy and assistance” (Fehr, 1996, p. 20.) Distinguishing features include its egalitarian and cooperative nature, characteristics that foster the development of its central attribute, intimacy. The critical qualitative shift between acquaintances and friends is the development of a sense of intimacy in the relationship (Fehr, 1996). The extent of sharing personal information and the personal importance of what is disclosed increases as closeness develops (Finkenauer et al., 2018). This self-disclosure contributes to and also reflects liking for another individual (Collins & Miller, 1994). In research with Canadian university students and a Canadian community sample, Fehr (2004) found that certain patterns of behavior were regarded as prototypical in contributing to intimacy in same-sex friendship. Especially critical was a sense of “responsive self-disclosure” as well as being emotionally supportive and loyal. By contrast, behaviors such as practical help or requesting advice were rated as less central to promoting intimacy.

Individuals' expectations about the qualities and behaviors that define the meaning of friendship guide their feelings about this relationship at different stages (Hall, 2012). Using factor analytic approaches to identify core dimensions emerging across multiple existing measures, Hall (2012) found support for six dimensions that described the “ideal expectations” about friendship: giving help and assistance; having enjoyable times; perceived similarity and one's friend having resources, such as fitness, money, connections (labeled “agency”). The remaining two dimensions, of particular interest here, were “communion” and “symmetrical reciprocity.” The first term refers self-disclosure (talking about one's problems/ feelings), while the second reflects the expectation of ongoing supportiveness from one's friend (emotional support; “being there” no matter the circumstances).

As Fehr and Harasymchuk (2022) note, most research on core aspects of friendship has been conducted in the United States and Canada, and intimacy has been identified as a central feature. Different understandings of oneself and one's social world(s) shape what is valued in friendship (Adams & Plaut, 2003), and there is supportive cross-cultural evidence for this observation (Adams & Plaut, 2003; Apostolou et al., 2021; French et al., 2006). For example, Adams and Plaut (2003) found that Ghanaian participants regarded practical aspects of friendship, such as financial support, social support and advice, as more important friendship qualities compared to participants from the United States.

Considering how different experiences in an individual's social worlds contribute to qualities valued in friendship is also of importance within a given society. Fehr and Harasymchuk (2022) called attention to the need to explore the defining features of friendship among individuals from underrepresented groups, commenting that this important issue had received little attention. This neglect of the experiences of underrepresented groups illustrates a broader critique of the research literature in psychology (Roberts et al., 2020).



2.1 Cross-group friendship: values and expectations
Individuals' interactions with current and past friends influence what they expect and value from friendship (Hall, 2012). Given considerable evidence of similarity preferences (homophily) characterizing individuals' social networks, it seems likely that the expectations about same-sex friendship in previous research (e.g., Fehr, 2004; Hall, 2012) have, for the most part, been based on experiences of own-group friendships. As Samter and colleagues pointed out, expectations of receiving emotional support from same-sex friends is an important feature of friendship among White, middle-class adults (Samter et al., 1997). They examined perceptions of the importance of emotional supportiveness in a same-sex friendship among university students (self-identified as African-American, Asian-American and Euro-American) and found differences in the specific approaches regarded as important, such as the relative “person-centeredness” of messages of emotional support. These differences could create difficulties for intergroup friendships (Samter et al., 1997). When discussing a specific study, the description of research participants' group identities uses the term(s) employed by the authors in their paper. Throughout the rest of the paper, APA Inclusive Language Guidelines were followed (American Psychological Association, 2021).

In a recent study, Davis and High (2019) asked Black women and White women to assess several dimensions and types of supportiveness when recalling a conversation about a stressful personal event discussed with either a same-race or different-race friend of the same sex. Several differences between various dimensions occurred (for example, the women's perception of the emotional support they needed versus what they received), suggesting overall, a more positive appraisal of the support received from a same-race friend. Interestingly, an unexpected finding occurred that suggested the potential power of “positive expectancy violations”; namely, participants regarded their different-race friends especially positively whom they recalled as having offered more support for their sense of self-worth than they were expecting or needing (Davis & High, 2019, p. 208).

The above findings illustrate the importance of identifying the qualities valued in intergroup compared to intragroup friendships and the perceived importance of these friendship qualities. Galupo and Gonzalez (2013), in survey study of adults in the United States, examined whether individuals who had or did not have at least one cross-group friend differed in their ratings of the importance of six different friendship values. No differences were found comparing these groups across two types of cross-group friendships (race; sexual orientation) on friendship values; namely, dimensions of perceived support, as well as integrity and personal respect for their friend.

By contrast, differences were found when comparing those who did or did not have a cross-group friendship on the three items assessing dimensions expected to be of particular relevance to cross-identity friendship (viz., being nonjudgmental, similarity of values, having similar personal lives (see Galupo & Gonzalez, 2013). Of particular interest here, compared to those not reporting cross-race or cross-orientation friendship, individuals reporting cross-race friendship or cross-orientation friendship attributed less importance to having similar personal lives. Individuals with at least one cross-orientation friendship and White individuals with at least one cross-race friendship rated similar values as being less important compared with those without these respective cross-group friendships.

The nature of intergroup relations, especially if characterized by previous and/or ongoing conflict or oppression, can influence individuals' expectations about the core features of friendship. Identifying the qualities valued in intergroup friendships may benefit from considering another type of personal relationship, that of an ally, defined as an individual who seeks to promote positive social change through supporting those from nondominant groups (Brown & Ostrove, 2013). Brown and Ostrove (2013) examined how members of nondominant groups described individuals whom they regarded as allies and subsequently developed a measure to assess perceptions of allies among college students of color. Participants were asked to describe the characteristics of “a person outside of your racial group with whom you feel comfortable” (Brown & Ostrove, 2013, p. 2215). After this initial statement, this nominated individual was referred to as “a friend.” Two dimensions emerged as characterizing allies; viz, “informed action” (e.g., “my friend takes action to address bias among his or her own racial/ethnic group;” “my friend proposes possible actions to address potentially racist situations affecting me”) and “affirmation” (“my friend is interested in what happens to me;” my friend is respectful towards me”) (Brown & Ostrove, 2013, table 1, p. 2216).

Ostrove and Brown (2018) asked students of color to identify both a white ally and a white friend and evaluate these individuals (now described as “this person”). White allies were perceived as more affirmative and more likely to show active support than were white friends. However, it was hard to clearly differentiate between an ally and a friend, since those nominated as allies also had the qualities of friends (Ostrove & Brown, 2018). Perhaps different degrees of friendship (e.g., differences in perceived closeness) came to mind when participants nominated a White “ally” compared with a White “friend” since an ally was defined as someone whom participants were sure that they could rely on for support if they encountered group-related mistreatment (compared with their uncertainty about the nominated friend's support).

Given the goals of their research, the authors commented on the need to examine whether and when a person could be an ally, though not a friend (Ostrove & Brown, 2018). However, the reverse also merits attention; namely, in a cross-group friendship, can a person can be regarded as a close friend without also being perceived as a potential ally? Although the role of cross-group friendship has been examined for its role in encouraging allyship (Calcagno, 2016), some of the qualities of an ally may be a valued feature of intergroup friendship. If an individual confronts mistreatment and/or disadvantage related to their social identity (or identities), their perception that their friend will acknowledge its impact may be an important component of cross-group friendship.

Stotzer's (2009) research on “straight allies” is relevant here. In Stotzer's research, university students who self-identified as heterosexual and who previously had reported positive attitudes toward gay men were interviewed individually with the goal of understanding the development of their accepting attitudes towards peers whose sexual orientation was lesbian, gay or bisexual. Reflecting on their high school experiences, when becoming aware of the struggles being confronted by friends who came out, a common theme reported was feelings of distress and empathy as well as “a feeling of resistance” against this discrimination and maltreatment experienced by their peers (Stotzer, 2009, p. 75).

In addition to feelings of distress, however, the perception that a friend will offer active support in a way that does not impinge on an individual's sense of agency may be an important feature of cross-group friendship. The nature of a friend's supportive behavior and how it is perceived in a cross-group friendship may, in part, also reflect that friend's awareness of their own social identities. An awareness that their relative societal advantages/privileges associated with one or more of these identities reflects status in social hierarchies rather than attributable to merit (American Psychological Association, 2021) may be an important component of cross-group friendship. Illustrating the importance of this awareness for promoting supportive actions, Uluğ and Tropp (2021) found that White individuals' awareness of advantaged social identity played an important role in being motivated to promote social justice through collective action when observing discriminatory behavior toward Black people. In Ostrove and Brown's work on the characteristics of allies, White participants who had been nominated as allies by students of color were more likely to acknowledge their own privileged status than non-allies (Ostrove & Brown, 2018).



2.2 Implications
Considered together, what do these findings suggest about qualities valued in intergroup friendships? As discussed above, there is evidence (e.g., Galupo & Gonzalez, 2013) for individuals' valuing qualities of friendship (trust, being responsive, and supportive) that reflect core aspects of friendship that are central to conceptual accounts (e.g., Fehr, 2004; Hall, 2012) of this close relationship. In addition, there may be distinctive qualities of cross-group friendship considered to be important that are related to individuals' respective group identities (e.g., Galupo & Gonzalez, 2013).

One important type of awareness that merits empirical attention is the acknowledgment of life experiences related to their respective group statuses, particularly if these statuses reflect different types of opportunities and barriers and the development of intergroup friendship. Building on prior work discussed here ((e.g., Brown & Ostrove, 2013; Ostrove & Brown, 2018), it is suggested here that perceived psychological allyship is a distinctive valued friendship quality of intergroup friendship. Depending on the nature and history of intergroup relations, there are likely to be other dimensions valued as important friendship qualities in intergroup friendship.



3 FRIENDSHIP POTENTIAL
3.1 Challenges of initial encounters
Considering intergroup friendship as a bridge, crossing this bridge depends on how different social contexts in which individuals negotiate personal relationships, are perceived and experienced. There is considerable evidence that these social contexts are challenging (Fehr & Harasymchuk, 2022). Much social psychological research on cross-group dyadic interaction has involved interactions between individuals whose respective social identities reflect group interaction histories in which there has been and/or continues to be intergroup conflict, past or ongoing discrimination or differential advantage. In these circumstances, the challenge is to create an interpersonal space in which individuals feel psychologically safe and comfortable to consider forming a friendship.

Daily encounters with individuals from diverse groups contribute to expectations about cross-group interactions. Mallett et al. (2016) asked Asian-American, Black American and European American students about their daily interactions; namely, positive (happy, pleasant) and negative feelings (sad, unpleasant), whether they felt understood by their partner and about their interaction partner's demographic characteristics (e.g., gender, race) compared with themselves (same, different, do not know). Their research was conducted across three different university campuses. No differences occurred for reported negative feelings in same-group versus cross-group interactions. However, some evidence indicated that cross-race interactions were reported as being less positive than same-race interactions. Moreover, in each of the three studies, participants reported that in cross-race compared with same-race interactions, they felt less understood when asked about “personal self” (e.g., their “personality”) and “collective self” (e.g., their “social and cultural background”). One implication of these findings was that cross-race interactions were experienced as “more challenging and depleting” (Mallett et al., 2016, p. 245) than same-race interactions.

One factor that may contribute to less positive encounters in everyday cross-group interaction are behaviors which convey a different message than explicitly intended. Conley et al. (2002) asked individuals who identified as lesbian, bisexual or gay about the problematic behaviors shown to them by individuals identifying as heterosexual, such as using language that expressed prejudice subtly or indirectly. Furthermore, Conley et al. (2003) found that these lesbian, gay or bisexual adults varied their expectations and behaviors when asked to imagine themselves encountering an unfamiliar heterosexual adult who differed in prejudice towards lesbian, gay or bisexual individuals. Cross-group dyadic interactions can be more effortful because group-related attitudes influence expectations about the interaction and behavioral choices.

Understanding barriers to positive intergroup relations has guided much research on cross-group dyadic interaction. The framework guiding much research has examined how various interpersonal expectations and attitudes of societally advantaged group members (e.g., White persons) are related to behaviors towards individuals from societally disadvantaged groups (e.g, Aboriginal/First Nations persons; Black persons). Research on intergroup encounters has focused on the difficulties of becoming closer due, for example, to concerns about appearing prejudiced, failure to understand overtures of friendship, interaction goals.

Studies of dyadic interracial and interethnic interaction have identified aspects of these initial encounters that make starting a friendship more difficult. Group-related expectations and concerns contribute to difficulties in intergroup encounters. Shelton (2003) examined the impact of concerns about prejudice in an intergroup encounter between Black undergraduates and White undergraduates. Half the Black participants were led to believe that their partner might be prejudiced, while half the White participants were told to try not to be prejudiced during the interaction. Being told not to appear prejudiced heightened White students' feelings of anxiety, but Black students reported more positive reactions to their partner (greater liking and friendship potential) compared to those whose partner had not received these instructions. By contrast, in the prejudice possible context, where Black students anticipated a potentially prejudiced White partner, a more positive reported interaction experience happened for both members of the dyad. This finding might have been due to Black students' highly skillful behavior during these interactions, but the personal cost of these actions could be seen in greater discomfort (more observed fidgeting behavior) by Black participants (Shelton, 2003), suggesting more effortful interaction in some intergroup encounters.

Shelton et al. (2009) found that when anticipating meeting and talking with a Black student, White students, in particular those who indicated lower levels of prejudice, reported stronger concerns about being rejected compared to lack of interest in a potential cross-group friendship. However, when asked how they believed their potential friend might feel, the opposite pattern occurred; namely they believed their partner would have less interest in becoming friends compared with being concerned about rejection, providing support for an “attributional bias” framing their expectations about an anticipated cross-group interaction (Shelton et al., 2009).

Vorauer (2005), conducting research at a Canadian university, found that White undergraduate students who expressed less prejudice were more likely to overestimate that they had clearly communicated their friendship interest to a First Nations undergraduate student compared to a White student. Among White participants who indicated less prejudice towards individuals from First Nations, there was a greater difference between what their partners perceived and the friendship interest that White students believed that they had expressed when interacting with a First Nations student, as contrasted with a White student, a process labeled signal amplification (Vorauer, 2005).

A similar overestimation of their communicated friendship interest occurred among White Canadian undergraduates' initial interaction with Chinese Canadian students (Vorauer & Sakamoto, 2006). Among majority group students who indicated less personal contact with minority group students, when comparing their beliefs about how their partner perceived their friendship interest with their partner's report, greater overestimation occurred when interacting with a Chinese Canadian student than with a White Canadian student (Vorauer & Sakamoto, 2006). This type of cross-group misperception between the message (friendship interest) sent by one person and perceived by the other individual did not occur among Chinese Canadian undergraduates when paired with a White Canadian student.

Subsequently, Vorauer and colleagues have examined how factors that might be expected to facilitate initial cross-group interactions, specifically between Aboriginal students and White students, can be problematic. For example, Vorauer, Martens, and Sasaki (2009, Study 4) examined the impact of White students' perspective-taking compared to a more objective “observational” orientation on how Aboriginal students felt after a “get-acquainted” meeting. In cross-group interaction sessions where less prejudiced White undergraduates, as assessed previously, were asked to adopt either a” perspective-taking” or an “objective” orientation, Aboriginal students reported feeling less happy in the former compared to the latter condition. Additional analyses suggested to the authors that perspective-taking resulted in less behavioral effort and greater complacency (Vorauer et al., 2009).

Similarly, although it might be expected that White undergraduates' awareness of the possibility of their own biases towards Aboriginal students might be helpful in improving the quality of initial cross-group interactions, Vorauer's (2012) research does not support this expectation. In Study 1, Aboriginal undergraduate students who were paired with a White student for a brief face-to-face interaction after their White partner had just completed a race-related IAT felt that their partner had a less positive impression of them, compared with those whose partner had not completed this task. Study 2 replicated this finding but also found that Aboriginal students perceived their White partners who completed the race-related IAT as disclosing less personal information compared with White partners in the control condition (no IAT completed). Subsequent mediation analysis supported the possibility that calling attention to their potential race-related biases using the IAT contributed to greater constraint in White participants' behavior toward their partner as reflected in less self-disclosure (Vorauer, 2012).

The purpose or goal that individuals bring to intergroup interactions, particularly, how they wish to be perceived, may influence how they behave in the encounter (Bergsieker et al., 2010). Across several studies, the findings supported the presence of different reported interaction goals for Black undergraduates and Latino/a undergraduates compared to White undergraduates. Asked to imagine an interracial encounter, compared with White undergraduates, Black undergraduates and Latino/a undergraduates stressed the importance of being respected or perceived as competent, respectively, when making a forced choice between these qualities and alternatives, such as being liked or related attributes. No differences occurred when students from these groups were asked to imagine same-group interactions. In another study, White students valued being seen by a cross-group friend as moral or likeable more highly than being seen as competent compared to Black students and Latino/a students. Once again, no differences occurred when students made the same ratings for a same-group friend. These results suggested group differences in how individuals wished to be seen by their partner in cross-group interaction, with respect and related dimensions emphasized among young adults from minority groups.

In a related domain, differences in why a person is motivated to avoid behavior that reflects prejudice have been identified by Plant and Devine (1998). These researchers developed a measure of internal motivation based on one's personal standards (e.g., being egalitarian) versus external motivation based on complying with anti-prejudice norms (e.g., not wishing to appear prejudiced). LaCosse and Plant (2020) across a series of studies assessed the implications of both types of motivation for cross-group interaction, by examining White undergraduates' responses to an imagined or anticipated interaction with a Black undergraduate student. For example, when imagining an interaction, White students who reported greater external motivation to avoid prejudiced behavior were more focused on themselves and their own needs; namely, not behaving in a way that might be indicative of prejudice. By contrast, more internal motivation was associated a greater focus on their partner when asked to imagine how they might behave (e.g., respectful behavior to their partner).

Next, LaCosse and Plant (2020) examined the behavioral correlates associated with internal and external motivation to avoid prejudice. After viewing a pre-recorded video of a Black student with whom they expected to interact, White participants made their own video, ostensibly to be shown to their partner. White students whose motivation for avoiding prejudiced behavior was more internal were more partner-focused in their behavior. In one study, for example, these behaviors included greeting their partner, showing enthusiasm when making their video for their partner; appearing to be trying to talk to their partner when making their video.



3.2 Implications
Much of this research has examined how the perceptions and behaviors of participants from more advantaged groups contribute to dyadic interaction with individuals from less advantaged groups. One paradoxical pattern of some findings on cross-race dyadic interaction is that factors which might be predicted to facilitate cross-group interaction, such as lower levels of reported prejudice, perspective-taking, or awareness of one's own bias, have not been associated with improved interaction outcomes. Various interpretations of these findings have been offered, such as the constraining impact of awareness of one's implicit bias on subsequent cross-group interaction (Vorauer, 2012).

To understand how cross-group interactions contribute to the perception of potential friendship, more research designs are needed that place individuals whose group identities have been associated with societal oppression as the focal person. Research findings on cross-group interaction related to sexual diversity illustrate the importance of this perspective. Conley et al. (2002) found that gay men and lesbians reported an active role, rather than reactive, in cross-group interactions with heterosexual individuals, “actively guiding these situations, to a much larger extent than heterosexuals report guiding similar situations” (p. 107). Conley and colleagues commented that this perspective was understandable given the possibility of their experiencing oppression related to their sexual identity. Moreover, as noted previously, lesbians and gay men reported shaping their interpersonal behavior depending on the level of prejudice towards gender and sexually diverse people they perceived when interacting with heterosexual individuals (Conley et al., 2002). These findings are consistent with Shelton's (2003) research findings discussed earlier on interracial (Black-White) dyadic encounters, suggesting an active, more skilled (Shelton, 2003) but also more effortful interaction (Shelton, 2003) on the part of Black interaction partners compared to their White partners.



3.3 Friendship potential: Shared experiences, self-disclosure and the power of serendipity
Given these challenges, what might facilitate interactions that increase the potential for cross-group friendship? In some circumstances, individuals reported experiences of initial cross-group dyadic encounters are more positive than their expectations about these encounters (Mallett, Wilson, & Gilbert, 2008). Mallett and colleagues (2008) found support for an “intergroup forecasting error” across several studies employing diverse methods (e.g., daily diaries of expected versus experienced interactions; lab research examining cross-group interaction using confederates). They also found that focusing on one's apparent similarities (versus differences) from one's interaction partner, as defined by feedback about shared preferences, resulted in White undergraduate women reporting more positive expectations about interacting with a Black partner (Mallett et al., 2008, Study 3).

The importance of experiences which enhance the likelihood of discovering and encountering similarities is illustrated by research findings from a summer camp program designed to improve intergroup relations among Jewish Israeli and Palestinian youth (White et al., 2021). In this context, White et al. (2021) examined what factors contributed to developing cross-group personal relationships. The challenges of undertaking this type of research as described in Sherif's classic Robber's Cave experiment (see Sherif, 1988) continue, indeed were possibly heightened since the goals in the present study were to examine approaches for fostering closeness among youth from groups with a long history of pre-existing conflict. Given the goal of this program, participants from both groups were pre-assigned to different shared activities to facilitate opportunities for ongoing interaction. This assigned propinquity made a more important contribution to developing a relationship with a camp participant from a different group than from one's own group. Relationship formation was operationalized as participants' nominations of others attending the camp session to whom they felt “most close.” The researchers did not ask participants to nominate friends because of their concern that given the nature of the conflict between the two groups from which the participants came, some camp participants might not be willing to use the term friendship when asked about a cross-group personal relationship (White et al., 2021). Their decision illustrates the complexity of labeling a close relationships as friendship among individuals from groups in which there is intergroup conflict.

Certain types of activities (taking part in ongoing dialogue groups; sharing a bunk group) were more likely to be associated with a cross-group relationship. The researchers suggested that activities fostering “meaningful engagement” might be of greater importance for forming a cross-group relationship given the lower likelihood of voluntarily initiating these encounters among individuals from different groups. These encounters might include not only dealing with difficult conversations but also offering the chance for “surprisingly positive interactions,” (White et al., 2021, p. 92), given participants' prior expectations, such as, discovering agreement with an individual from the other group or having more opportunities for ongoing self-disclosures.

Cross-group interactions in the dialogue groups and among those sharing a bunk group in White et al.'s research also offered the possibility of a type of positive experience that might enhance the formation of greater interpersonal intimacy. Pinel and colleagues examined the role of I-sharing; namely, “the sense that one's subjective experience overlaps with at least one other person” (Pinel et al., 2006, pp. 243–244) and cross-group liking. This perception might or might not be accurate. Regardless, Pinel et al. (2006) suggested that I-sharing contributes to liking among others who are dissimilar with respect to various social identities. Supporting this prediction, greater liking occurred for a partner with whom participants did not share the focal social identity for a specific study (e.g., gender, sexual orientation, race) but with whom they had an experience of “I-sharing” compared to a partner sharing the same social identity with whom they did not have this experience (Pinel et al., 2018; Pinel & Long, 2012).

The experience of I-sharing was manipulated through a computerized game, called “Imaginiff” that asked participants for their reactions to a series of “nonsensical hypothetical questions” (Pinel & Long, 2012, p. 298). The rationale underlying this approach was that it required drawing on one's “in- the- moment subjective experience” given the nature of the questions (p. 299). In the I-sharing condition, there was agreement between the participant's and their presumed partner's reactions across the majority of the trials of the game compared to no agreement on any trials in the non I-sharing condition (Pinel & Long, 2012). Their measure of liking included items such as potential friendship, interest in meeting the partner, perceived comfort.

Pinel and Long (2012) suggested that since perceived sharing of one's subjective experience with another individual facilitates liking, these experiences may make an important contribution to cross-group friendships. They commented that although group-related awareness of differences is still apparent, liking is facilitated by “the feelings of closeness that subjective similarity provides” (Pinel & Long, 2012). As applied to White et al.'s findings, participants' sense of having shared similar moments of their individual experiences with another that transcend their respective group labels may be important because these moments are spontaneous. As such, these experiences, however brief, may be seen as being authentic, encouraging the start of a closer bond. Moreover, unexpected shared positive moments characterize shared fun or relaxation, and as Fehr (1996) noted, these experiences signal closeness in a relationship.

As noted above, White et al. (2021) also suggested the potential for ongoing self-disclosure over time as a contributing to the observed effect of “assigned proximity” on campers' reporting a close relationship with a member from the other group. The importance of ongoing self-disclosure over time for creating interpersonal bonds has been powerfully demonstrated in an experimental procedure developed by Aron et al. (1997) that involves dyadic interaction between unacquainted individuals, each responding to a series of questions that increasingly call for sharing more personal and more intimate types of information about oneself, in essence, greater self-disclosure. Recently, Sprecher (2021) compared this “Fast Friends” approach with two other approaches: one also developed by Aron et al. (1997) involving a structured series of questions reflecting “small talk,” and the other, an unstructured “get-acquainted” approach. Compared to the “small talk” approach, the “Fast Friends” approach resulted in higher ratings across several relationship-relevant dimensions, including not only closeness but also liking, enjoying interacting, perceiving their partner as being responsive, similar to them and liking them as well as wanting to interact again with their partner. These differences did not, however, occur when the “Fast Friends” approach was compared to the unstructured “get-acquainted” approach.

When describing their structured self-disclosure procedure, Aron et al. (1997) noted that its purpose was to create a “temporary feeling of closeness” (p. 364) providing the opportunity to test various relationship-related hypotheses in a controlled setting. Subsequent research findings, however, have suggested that the impact of these temporary feelings might last beyond the initial encounters. In part, this feeling of being close may be attributable to the shared experience of enjoying the task itself. Evidence that participants enjoyed taking part was reported in a classroom version of this procedure. Not only was the average enjoyment rating quite high, rated enjoyment was strongly related to a composite measure of their feelings of closeness to their partner (Aron et al., 1997). In other words, the Fast-Friends task involved sharing increasingly personal information about oneself in a non-threatening context which was fun. Instructions given to participants stated that “to help you get close we've arranged for the two of you to engage in a kind of sharing game” (Aron et al., 1997, p. 374). Although self-disclosure questions became increasingly more personal and serious in content, framing the task as a “sharing game” to encourage closeness supported a non-threatening atmosphere. The goal of the task was relational, encouraging participants to focus on their partner.

Among researchers studying intergroup relations, the Fast-Friends approach has been used to test hypotheses about its impact on intergroup interactions. For example, Page-Gould et al. (2008) on cross-group (Latina/o and White undergraduate students) dyadic interaction examined the effects of the Fast-Friends procedure, plus another relationship-building task across 3 weeks on cortisol reactivity and other indicators of anxiety. Their findings supported the efficacy of the Fast-Friends task for lowering anxiety about intergroup interactions, at least in the short term, especially among those more likely to report greater anxiety about these encounters. Welker et al. (2014) compared the effectiveness of the Fast Friends approach plus two other tasks to create a sense of closeness during same-race or cross-race dyadic interaction or interaction between couples on intergroup attitudes. The pattern of findings suggested that participating in these tasks as a couple might have a more beneficial effect on intergroup attitudes, especially on measures assessing affective responses (warmth) and being interested in intergroup interaction.



3.4 Implications
These findings suggest that shared affective moments are associated with feelings of interpersonal closeness. Moreover, if experienced in a context where these feelings may be unexpected from the perspective of individuals' respective group identities, these shared affective moments may be more salient and feel authentic, opening the possibility for more relaxed subsequent interpersonal behavior. Identifying situations that have the potential to facilitate these types of experiences merits ongoing research attention. It is not, however, being argued here that these experiences are a panacea. The findings discussed suggest that these experiences can contribute to starting individuals towards potential friendship, but as will be seen in the next section, challenges remain.



4 RELATIONSHIP QUALITIES
Developing a friendship is characterized by the interpersonal efforts of both individuals. Ogolsky and Monk (2018) present a comprehensive framework discussing how the maintenance of personal relationships can be understood at different levels of analysis (e.g., individual as contrasted with relational processes). One challenge discussed by Ogolsky and Monk (2018) has been to identify the purpose by served these interpersonal efforts; for example, to improve a relationship, prevent it ending or support the relationship as is. Friendship has been described as “the most tenuous type of relationship” (Oswald & Clark, 2006, p. 333). Oswald et al. (2004) found support for four behavioral dimensions for maintaining friendship which they labeled: positivity, supportiveness, openness, and interaction. Positivity reflects enjoyment of each other's company (making each other laugh; expressing gratitude; avoiding blaming each other). Supportiveness describes behaviors that bolster each other's esteem and confidence in a non-judgmental manner (acceptance; being there; offering one's support). Openness involves behaviors that are self-disclosing and interpersonally relaxed (confiding in each other; showing affection). The last dimension, interaction, indicates willingness to and interest in spending time with each other (making time for each other though busy; celebrating special events in each other's lives). Oswald and Clark (2006) found support for the contribution of these behaviors at the dyadic-level of mutually being committed to and satisfied with the friendship. Although Oswald and colleagues framework was not developed to focus on intergroup friendship, research described in the following section suggests complexities encountered, especially related to the dimensions of openness (self-disclosure) and supportiveness (non-judgmental acceptance).



4.1 Developing intimacy in intergroup friendship
Theory and research on the development and maintenance of intimacy in personal relationships have focused on self-disclosure, responsiveness to another's self-disclosures (how one's partner reacts) and of particular importance, how an individual perceives their partner's reaction to one's self-disclosures (Laurenceau & Kleinman, 2006; Reis & Shaver, 1988). In Reis and Shaver's (1988) model, intimacy between two people depends on each individual's sense of being understood, affirmed and “cared for” given the other person's behavior towards them when they reveal aspects of themselves, such their personal goals, wishes or feelings.

In a seminal study, Shelton et al. (2010) examined the importance of the three components discussed above—self-disclosure, perceived partner disclosure and perceived partner responsiveness—for fostering friendship among both intraracial and interracial dyads. Black undergraduates and White undergraduates assessed their interactions every weeks for 10 weeks with a same-sex potential Black friend and same-sex potential White friend of their choice. Self-disclosure and reported partner disclosure each were measured by two items: extent of disclosure of personal information and extent of sharing emotions. Feeling understood and supported (perceived acceptance and caring) defined perceived partner responsiveness, while intimacy was measured by perceived closeness.

Perceived partner responsiveness by a potential friend emerged as a key factor across both intraracial and interracial pairs. Specifically, the relation between reported closeness and the two disclosure measures was either partly mediated (self-disclosure) or fully mediated (perceived partner disclosure) by perceived partner responsiveness, providing support for the pivotal contribution of this dimension to developing interpersonal intimacy (Shelton et al., 2010). However, at each part of any encounter—what a person discloses to another; how the other responds and how that response is perceived—is affected by myriad factors which together comprise each individual's interpretive filter (Reis & Shaver, 1988).

Group-related expectations and experiences may impact various components of an encounter. For example, an individual's desire to be liked (affiliation goal) does not necessarily guarantee an accurate understanding of their partner's views/feelings, particularly about their group membership or about group-related experiences, such as discrimination (Holoien et al., 2015). In two types of cross-group dyadic interactions (between roommates and between partners [strangers] in a laboratory setting), among undergraduates from minority groups, a greater desire to be liked by their partner was related to a more accurate understanding of their White partner. By contrast, among White undergraduates in cross-race pairs, a stronger desire to be liked by their partner was related to less accuracy in their roommate's or partner's report of feeling understood, especially as related to race-related issues. In addition, greater discrepancy in perceived understanding of their partner (relative to their partner's feeling understood), was associated with several negative reported relationship qualities (such as, less closeness, less trust in Study 1; less positive view of partner, less cared for in Study 2).

In the study described previously (Shelton et al., 2010), among Black undergraduates, potential same-sex interracial friendships were rated less positively than intraracial ones on several dimensions (self-disclosure; partner's disclosures; perceptions of partner's responsiveness). Both Black students and White students reported less closeness in a developing same-sex interracial friendship compared to an intraracial friendship. Shelton and Richeson (2006) found that among minority undergraduate students (Black, Asian American, Hispanic, and multiracial) describing their relationship with a same-sex White or Black close friend (Study 1), less favorable racial attitudes were associated with lower reported friendship quality with a White friend.

Kao and Joyner's (2004) findings with a nationally representative survey of adolescents (grades 7–12) conducted in the United States revealed a similar pattern. Students from diverse groups (Asian/Pacific Islander; Black/African American; Hispanic and White) nominated up to five same-sex friends, with information about race and ethnicity retrieved separately from the study's records. This approach avoided the measurement issues raised by Smith (2002) who found that asking individuals directly about cross-racial friendship resulted in higher reports compared to more indirect procedures involving a “network approach” (e.g., first naming five “good friends” followed by asking about each friend's ethnicity and/or race (see Smith, 2002, p. 591 for an example). Kao and Joyner (2004) concluded that even when students formed an interracial friendship, this relationship was likely to be more difficult and challenging.

Experiencing intimacy in a relationship reflects not only each individual's sense of being affirmed and understood by their partner but also, their attempts to meet their partner's needs (Laurenceau & Kleinman, 2006). Using a daily diary approach completed by both members of same-sex female and male roommate pairs across 15 days, less of a sense of intimacy (feeling close, liking) and less positive emotional responses were reported by those in mixed-race roommate dyads than same-race pairs (Trail et al., 2009). Students were also asked about their roommates positive (e.g., ease of interaction, warmth, smiling) and negative (e.g., avoiding gaze, fidgeting) behaviors each day. Fewer “intimacy-building” behaviors were reported by those in mixed-race roommate pairs compared with those with same-race roommates, and across time, minority students (Black or Latino/a) with a White roommate reported a decline in their positive feelings. Mediation analyses indicated the importance of perceived “intimacy-building” behaviors for understanding the dynamics of these emerging mixed-race and same-race roommate relationships.

As Laurenceau and Kleinman (2006) noted, nonverbal communication is important in promoting or deterring intimacy since, for example, it powerfully conveys an individual's emotional reactions and is ongoing throughout an interaction. Moreover, since an individual's perception that they are understood and supported by their partner is a defining feature of intimacy, being able to understand not only what is being said but how is critical (Laurenceau & Kleinman, 2006). Trawalter and Richeson (2008) examined nonverbal reactions of intraracial dyads (White-White) or interracial dyads (Black-White) asked to discuss a topic related to race as well as two topics unrelated to race. A sample from each participant's nonverbal behavior (audio off) when replying to each topic was rated on several indicators of anxiety (e.g., making fewer gestures, less leaning forward to talk, rigid facial expression).

White students showed more anxious behaviors when talking with a Black partner than with a White partner, regardless of the topic discussed. Black students showed less anxious behavior talking with a White partner about the race-related topic (efforts on the part of the administration related to diversity on campus) compared to the two race-neutral topics (Trawalter & Richeson, 2008). As the authors noted, there are different interpretations of this finding, but one possibility is Black participants' greater experience/skill when talking about race, as well as the context of the research; namely, the “safe space” of a research lab on campus (Trawalter & Richeson, 2008).



4.2 Challenges of intimacy: interpersonal banter
As the above discussion shows, addressing and negotiating differences in group-related experiences is relevant for intergroup friendships. The influence of these group-related factors, whether or not individuals acknowledge or are aware of their impact, is important for the perceived quality of their friendship. To illustrate, interpersonal behaviors, banter, and teasing, can be a sign of intimacy in a close relationship, a shared interpersonal privilege. However, group-directed banter and other group-related remarks can negatively affect intergroup friendships. The inferred meaning of this type of banter and teasing affects how the relationship is perceived. Narratives from recent qualitative research contrasting the experiences of minority group members (gay men and African-Caribbean men) and majority group members (heterosexuals and Whites) discussing their cross-group friendships, found different perspectives on the meaning of group-related banter and teasing (Greenland et al., 2020).

The minority group individuals interviewed were all university educated (part of previous research on their university experience), while the majority group members, participating in focus groups, came from a range of socioeconomic backgrounds. Majority group participants were likely to discount or deny any implications of prejudice by claiming that the fact of friendship itself precluded labeling as prejudice any banter containing references to their friend's group identity. Comments from minority group participants, however, indicated more uncertainty about the meaning of this group-related teasing or banter and/or a reluctance to “call out” a friend for their behavior, given the possible costs to their relationship (Greenland et al., 2020).

The type of interpersonal banter described above involved explicit group references. However, banter or teasing also can have unintended group-related meanings that can affect friendship quality. A narrative analysis of interracial friendship illustrates the importance of this awareness, as described in a series of ongoing reflections about their friendship (Diggs & Clark, 2002). These scholars in the area of Communication Studies first met and began their friendship when they were graduate students. In their insightful article, Diggs and Clark, each commenting on the growth of their friendship, recalled a problematic incident that occurred several years into their friendship. As described by the authors, this incident resulted from a remark, intended to be “playful banter” made by Clark, a White woman, to Diggs, a Black woman.

The reasons why the incident was perceived as problematic evolved over the years. Their initial understanding focused on their respective personal differences and family background (e.g., different valuing of teasing/banter) as influencing how they interpreted the teasing. Subsequently, after continuing reflection, their understanding grew to consider how issues related to race were central for addressing what happened and why their reactions were initially very different. They identified several features of their communication that created difficulties, such as “use of unknowingly loaded words” and “code switching between contexts” (Diggs & Clark, 2002, p. 384.).

The challenges identified in this narrative analysis (Diggs & Clark, 2002) illustrate how group identities can shape discrepant understandings of a given interaction in cross-group friendship. Interestingly, this description parallels expectations and potential concerns about race-related conversations (Sanchez et al., 2022). Black adults and White adults, when asked for their views of talking about race, specifically, Black individuals' experience, as part of an interracial friendship, described benefits of greater interpersonal closeness but also identity-related risks.



4.3 Implications
Once a relationship is labeled as friendship, the very intimacy that sustains the bond may reveal other deeper layers of misunderstanding and miscommunication that are more difficult to address. Those on the receiving end of group-related remarks from friends, not only may wonder about their meaning and what these behaviors might reveal about the friendship, but must decide whether and how to respond. Themes from clinically-focused qualitative research suggest that the relative personal importance of one's multiple social identities contributes to how a person responds, but the burden of response often is on the receiver of these behaviors (Nadal et al., 2015).



4.4 Identity, privilege and intergroup friendship
Research on “group identity privileging” found that across identity domains (gender, race/ethnicity, sexual orientation), college students from societally advantaged groups in the United States (European-American; men; heterosexual) were less likely to report thinking about their own group identity compared to those students from disadvantaged groups (African American or Hispanic American; women; lesbian, gay, or bisexual), contributing to the former groups being less likely to acknowledge the benefits of a dominant group identity (Pratto & Stewart, 2012). A growing literature on the psychology of privilege attests to the importance of this perspective (e.g., McIntosh, 2012).

Considering the role of “privileged identities” to interaction processes can contribute to understanding the development of intergroup friendship. In the narrative of interracial friendship described previously (Diggs & Clark, 2002), much of their reflection that led to a fuller “sense-making” about how they each understood the problematic interaction involved acknowledgment and awareness of group-related discrepancies associated with relative privilege. The authors commented that previously “our focus on ‘connectedness’ partly obscured our willingness to be fully aware of difference” (Diggs & Clark, 2002, p. 380). Importantly, they concluded that this “difficult discussion” about these differences contributed to the growth and strength of their relationship and ultimately to a sense of connectedness at another deeper level. The approach taken by Diggs and Clark (2002) illustrates the contribution of an analytical, narrative approach, in their case, reflecting on their own experiences. Interestingly, McIntosh (2012) called attention to the value of narrative approaches, in particular the value of “singular, autobiographical testimony” (p. 203) for the study of privilege.

Further evidence suggesting the importance of individuals' awareness and acknowledgment of group privilege as contributing to intergroup friendship can be seen in Ellis et al.'s (2019) research. They examined what factors positively and negatively contributed to the well-being of first-generation undergraduate students (neither of the student's parents had completed a four-year undergraduate degree). Their findings documented the positive impact of microaffirmations; supportive actions that help to foster a sense of belonging and being valued by others (Ellis et al., 2019). One source of microaffirmations occurred in peer relationships and suggests the perceived importance of the awareness of relative privilege to a cross-group friendship:
I have spoken openly to close friends about me being a first-generation college student and the background I came from. It was very surprising how my friends, who are for the most part quite wealthy, seem to respect my journey more than their own and view my success as more substantial than their own.

(Ellis et al., 2019, p. 275)
This student perceived friends' respect as being affirmative, but their affirmation reflected more than praise for individual achievement. The comment that friends viewed this student's success as a first-generation student as “more substantial than their own” suggested the friends' awareness of their own histories and advantages. This type of affirmation has the potential to enhance intimacy among individuals in an intergroup friendship. Acknowledging differential opportunities related to their respective group identities may increase the likelihood of feeling understood.

This type of awareness and acknowledgment is likely to be complex, however, given each individual's multiple social identities. Some of an individual's identities may be privileged while others may be marginalized, with implications for how they perceive and interact with others in a close relationship (Nadal et al., 2015). In their discussion of core features of intersectionality, Warner and Shields (2013) note that because intersecting identities may be associated with differential relationships of power, these intersections may be complex. In their conceptual commentary on intersectionality, Moradi and Grzanka (2017) called attention to the role played by interwoven social systems not only shaping experiences of being marginalized and excluded but also shaping opportunities and privilege. While the contribution of systemic factors to oppression is often the focus of the study of intersectionality, how social systems contribute to privileged social identities merits more consideration (Moradi & Grzanka, 2017). As applied to the development of intergroup friendship, interestingly, Ellis et al. (2019) research findings just discussed suggested that awareness and acknowledgment of differential privilege and its implications for one's friends' respective personal achievements contributed to the relationships dynamics.

The importance of considering the role of multiple social identities is supported by research on group-related friendship choices across several dimensions. Galupo (2009), in their survey of adults recruited from several sites across the United States including non-university contexts, found that close friendships reported by heterosexual women and heterosexual men were predominantly based on group-membership similarity, while the close friendships of individuals who were bisexual, lesbian, or gay revealed greater diversity (cross-gender; cross-orientation; cross-race). Interpreting these results, Galupo (2009) commented that among heterosexual women and men, their choices reflected privilege which gave them “more latitude in friendship choice and greater ability to choose friends who share similar characteristics” (p. 827).

Similar results were found by Baiocco et al. (2014) in a survey study of young adults in Italy (including participants recruited from university and non-university contexts). Participants were asked about the gender and sexual orientation of their “best friend” and their perception of the mutuality of this friendship. Of those indicating best friend, almost all perceived the friendship as being reciprocated. Compared with heterosexual men and women, gay men and lesbians more frequently indicated best friends who were cross-gender or cross-orientation. Young adults whose sexual orientation was lesbian or gay were “more likely to integrate different identities and belongings into their friendships”, reflecting “complementary qualities” as contrasted with the preference for similarity shown by young adults who were heterosexual (Baiocco et al., 2014, p. 117).



4.5 Implications
Given the above discussion, confronting differences in group-related experiences is important. Developing intimacy in intergroup friendships may be facilitated by individuals' awareness and acknowledgement of the opportunities and obstacles associated with their respective social identities. This perspective may be especially important for the development of intimacy in intergroup friendships if within a dyad, there are discrepancies in each individual's respective group identities in domains such as relative social privilege, likelihood of experiencing discrimination, opportunities in different domains. Particularly important for developing cross-group friendship may be individuals' awareness of these differences. A key component of this awareness is acknowledging one's own group membership(s) and its implications.



5 INTERGROUP FRIENDSHIP: CONCLUDING COMMENTS
Much social psychological research on cross-group friendship has focused on interracial or interethnic friendship, with a smaller literature on cross-group friendship reflecting gender diversity and sexual orientation. This paper reflects that focus and at the same time acknowledges the necessity to examine intergroup friendship within and across different domains of group identity. It is also important to acknowledge the cultural context of the research since the research discussed here was conducted almost entirely in the United States, with some studies conducted in Canada. Researchers studying friendship in the psychological literature on close relationships have examined the qualities and experiences of friendship across different cultural contexts as noted earlier.

Intergroup friendship reflects the ongoing discovery of commonalities interwoven with negotiating different experiences related to each individual's respective group(s) identities. With respect to discovering commonalities, the research findings discussed here suggest the importance of shared positive affective experiences, especially those which are unexpected. Much of the evidence for this possibility is based on the impact of procedures (e.g., I-sharing; Fast Friends) developed in lab-based research designed to enhance feelings of connection and closeness. Research is needed to identify specific features of social contexts (e.g., White et al., 2021) that may increase the likelihood of these shared, serendipitous, affective moments in both initial and ongoing interactions.

Concerning the negotiation of differences, given considerable evidence of homophily (e.g., McPherson et al., 2001), individuals' expectations about intergroup friendships may be more likely to be based on their groups' interaction histories than their own personal experiences. These expectations may emphasize different aspects of friendship and/or include additional distinctive components, depending on the nature of intergroup relations that contribute to individuals' social identities. As proposed here, when intergroup relations have a history of differential social advantage/power, qualities such as perceived psychological allyship may be one important dimension of friendship. Other qualities may also be important, depending on the specific nature of intergroup relations.

Group identities contribute to “perceived partner understanding,” a central component of intimacy in dyadic relationships. There is evidence of its importance in both intragroup and intergroup friendship (Shelton et al., 2010). However, feeling understood can be elusive and problematic in cross-group interactions (e.g., Holoien et al., 2015; Mallett et al., 2016). One factor facilitating felt understanding may be an individual's perception that a friend has self-awareness of their own group identities and experiences, including acknowledging differential group-related advantages and opportunities. The importance of this type of awareness was suggested in themes emerging from descriptions of cross-group friendships (Diggs & Clark, 2002; Ellis et al., 2019). In both cases, this type of reflective awareness was described as making a positive contribution to ongoing friendship. Given their importance, findings from research addressing social justice and inclusiveness, typically considered for their application to macro-level social issues, have relevance for understanding intergroup friendship.

Many, though not all, participants in the research discussed were young adults in university contexts. Young adults' experiences in the United States continue to document “the centrality of race and ethnicity in shaping young adults' lives” (Tran, 2019, p. 39). Similarly, in Canada, there is evidence for the importance of these identities for young adults (e.g., Medina et al., 2019). Interestingly, a consortium of researchers who study ethnic and racial identity have proposed a “meta-construct” that incorporates both these aspects of identity (ERI) to understand adolescent and young adults' development, arguing that this construct better reflects the lives (more global; experiencing intersecting identities) of contemporary youth cohorts (Umaña-Taylor et al., 2014).

The contribution of these intersecting and more complex social identities for developing friendship is an example of a potentially promising direction for research on intergroup friendship. Some of these identities may reflect other contexts and histories of intergroup relations which in turn contribute to expectations about friendship. For example, the diversity of the social contexts in which young adults study, work and live varies, contributing to differences in the likelihood of their forming intergroup friendships. Tran's (2019) analysis of interviews with young adults from four different regions of the United States found that in two urban areas, those interviewed typically described a “friendship circle” that mirrored the diversity of these cities. These interview data revealed that young adults frequently reported positive experiences with diversity in education and work settings but also indicated the enduring impact of a negative group-related encounter, such as experiencing discrimination (Tran, 2019).

Research concerning the likelihood and/or qualities of intergroup friendship has often focused on the relationship between individuals whose group identities reflect differential advantage(s) and group interaction histories. As reflected by the concepts and research findings discussed here, much of the current narrative about intergroup friendship is framed from the perspective of the challenges of these relationships and what factors might mitigate these challenges. Looking ahead, research is needed to continue examining these challenges but also to identify what features of social contexts support and facilitate opportunities for intergroup friendship.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author thanks two anonymous reviewers for their thoughtful comments.