
Learning Vicariously  From Failure:The Case of Major League Soccer and the Collapse of the North American Soccer League

Abstract
Organizations  are  often  encouraged  to  learn  from  the  failures  of  others. However,  failures  can  be  extremely  complicated  and  multifaceted,  defying clear  cause  attribution.  Learning  organizations  face  challenges  in  adopting and implementing the lessons of such failures and many times are unable to appropriately correct the root causes. Using a grounded theory approach, the authors present a learning case by Major League Soccer (MLS) from its failed predecessor―the North American Soccer League (NASL), depicting patterns of learning in four aspects: control, foreign players, media relation-ships, and financial viability. The authors propose a two-stage process model of vicarious learning from failure based on two fundamental processes: cause attribution and lesson implementation.Keywordsorganizational learning, vicarious learning, major league soccer, and North American soccer league

Introduction
Organizations  not  only  learn  directly  from  their  own  experiences  but  also vicariously  from  the  experiences  of  others.  Such  vicarious  learning  allows organizations  to  draw  insights  from  others’  failures  and  successes  without having to incur the costs of exploration and experimentation (Kim & Miner, 2007;  Terlaak  &  Gong,  2008).  At  the  same  time,  such  indirect,  vicarious learning can present challenges that are absent in more direct forms of learn-ing, such as exploration and exploitation, where organizations learn by doing, experiencing, experimenting, and trial and error (March, 1991). These chal-lenges  include  drawing  accurate  inferences  from  second-hand,  incomplete, and  complicated  information;  assessing  the  relevance  and  applicability  of such lessons; and implementing rules and lessons when the validity of such lessons is not apparent.Previous  research  on  organizational  learning  has  established  that  firms  do learn from others’ failures and near failures (Kim & Miner, 2007) and that such learning enhances their survival rates (Chuang & Baum, 2003; Ingram & Baum, 1997). Researchers have established the value of learning from failures through large-scale,  longitudinal  studies  in  varied  industries  such  as  U.S.  commercial banking (Kim & Miner, 2007), Ontario nurseries (Chuang & Baum, 2003), and hotel chains in Manhattan (Baum & Ingram, 1998). The common theme of previ-ous research is that vicarious learning from others’ failures is an attempt at imita-tion  where  the  learning  organizations  identify  relevant  practices  of  other organizations, infer their values, and adopt or avoid similar practices within their own organizations. They have been shown to be able to detect others’ failures (Greve, 1998), infer the value of practice (Haunschild & Miner, 1997), and adopt strategies that facilitate learning (Chuang & Baum, 2003).However,  the  conditions  surrounding  the  process  of  how  learning  occurs remain ambiguous in the literature. On one hand, organizations are acutely aware of  the  successes  and  failures  of  their  current  competitors  and  predecessors (Ingram & Baum, 1997) and look to imitate success and avoid failure (Chuang & Baum, 2003). On the other hand, the causal ambiguity and complexity that can surround  others’  failures  may  lead  to  misidentifying  the  causes  of  failures. Previous research indicates that organization-wide failure is rarely the result of a single  “bad”  decision  but  rather  a  chain  of  bad  decisions  (Mellahi,  2005). Therefore, the causes of failure may involve several interrelated issues that defy clear-cut  and  uniform  solutions.  In  addition,  learning  should  not  be  viewed merely  as  a  transmission  of  knowledge;  it  should  capture  individuals’  under-standing of what they need to acquire as a response to a recognized problem (Yeo &  Marquardt,  2010).  However,  challenges  arise  when  organizations  seek  to
implement  appropriate  lessons  learned  as  they  transfer  them  inside  their  own firms, resulting often in the misadoption or partial adoption of imitative practices (Siggelkow, 2001). Another ambiguity in the literature lies in the way that learn-ing outcomes are treated. Typically organizations are categorized as either hav-ing  learned  or  having  failed  to  learn.  The  organizational  reality  is  much  more complex, with firms being able to learn certain practices but not others.As a result, unanswered questions regarding vicarious learning from failure remain. For example, how does vicarious learning happen? What are the condi-tions that will lead to successful learning and what are the conditions that pre-clude  it?  Can  correct  learning  and  failure  to  learn  coexist  in  the  same organization? In this article, we explore these questions by building and pre-senting a process model of how vicarious learning can occur. Our paper takes a fine-grained approach to examine learning, depicting the conditions of cor-rect  learning,  wrongful  learning,  failure  to  learn,  and  noise.  Following  a grounded-theory methodology, we build theory from the examination of how one complex organization, Major League Soccer (MLS) learned from its high-profile, failed predecessor, the North American Soccer League (NASL).The latest attempt by investors to develop a professional soccer league in North America in light of the failure of NASL and the lack of American inter-est in soccer provides a rich context for the exploration of our research ques-tions.  The  time  lapse  between  the  failure  of  NASL  (1984)  and  the  start  of MLS (1996) offers opportunities for the new organization to draw inferences. In  addition,  the  complexity  of  growing  a  new  sports  league  in  a  less  than munificent environment provides a case context in which the decision mak-ers’ actions are under continuous examination by interested observers as the question of learning from failure has even been asked in the sports media. For example,  MLS  was  criticized  for  signing  international  superstar  David Beckham in 2007. The league viewed this as a means to grow its popularity and revenues. However, many compare this strategy to the failed marketing hype that surrounded NASL, which extensively utilized international super-stars as a strategy for building audience appeal. Critics in particular argue that MLS  is  repeating  the  mistakes  of  NASL  and  is  destined  to  similarly  fail (Bloom, 2007). MLS argues that it has learned from NASL’s mistakes and that  this  strategy  is  part  of  the  evolution  of  growing  the  league.  While  the verdict is still out on the experiment of using international stars in MLS, we see  this  context  as  an  ideal  means  of  generating  theory  about  whether  and how vicarious learning from failure occurs.We  explore  the  circumstances  that  have  facilitated  or  impeded  MLS  to learn vicariously from the failure of NASL. We identify four critical factors for the success of a professional sports league: ownership control, audience appeal, media relationships, and the long-term financial viability of the league. 
We analyze the different learning patterns of MLS related to the four factors, and describe why they were able to learn in certain areas, but not in others. Contrary to extant theory that treats vicarious learning as the wholesale imita-tion  of  practices  where  organizations  either  learn  or  fail  to  learn,  we  show that organizations exhibit complex patterns of learning. We propose that suc-cessful learning requires a combination of accurate cause attribution and pre-cise  implementation  and  that  failure  in  either  step  leads  to  unsatisfactory results. We further examine the underlying factors that facilitate attribution and implementation and propose a two-stage model of vicarious learning.We make three contributions to the failure and the vicarious learning litera-ture. First, our case is a rare account of how one complex organization learns by observing, imitating, and rectifying various practices from the multifaceted fail-ure of another similar organization. Previous studies have focused more on how organizations learn through imitating a particular practice, rather than by examin-ing the learning behavior regarding multiple practices (Chuang & Baum, 2003; Rhee, Kim, & Han, 2006). Second, by proposing a two-stage model, our study combines previous theoretical perspectives on failure and vicarious learning to give an explanation of successful vicarious learning. We go beyond the previous literature  of  the  simple  dichotomy  of  learning  versus  nonlearning  and  move toward  a  deeper  understanding  of  correct  inference/incorrect  inference  and implementation versus imprecise implementation. Third, our process model also identifies  the  key  factors  that  enable  or  hinder  failure  attribution  and  lesson implementation stages of vicarious learning. As a result, researchers and practi-tioners are better able to pinpoint the factors that cause either successful learning or failure to learn and thus improve the rate of success in learning.Overall we utilize a grounded-theory approach to understand the dynam-ics of learning vicariously from failure. To achieve this objective, we conduct a careful, qualitative examination of NASL’s failure and the subsequent start-up and ongoing evolution of MLS. We present our study in four sections. We first elaborate our theoretical orientation on vicarious learning from others’ failures,  establishing  the  central  propositions  in  the  current  literature.  We then  describe  our  research  procedures.  We  subsequently  analyze  the  cases from which our process model was developed, and finally, we conclude with a discussion of the broader implications for organizational theory.

Theoretical OrientationLearning From the Failures of Others
Scholars  have  long  asserted  that  organizations’  strategies  and  actions  are based partly on experience (Cyert & March, 1963; March, 1991; Levinthal & March, 1993; Simon, 1991). Experience is a key mechanism that facilitates learning and builds knowledge-based resources (Huber, 1991; Levin, 2000). However, direct experience, despite its benefits for enhancing efficiency and decreasing  production  cost,  can  lead  to  competency  traps,  a  result  of  local optimization (as opposed to global optimization) of direct experience (Ingram & Baum, 1997). Local optimization results from organizations’ tendency to engage in less risky, exploitative activities that offer more certain results in the  short  term  rather  than  in  highly  risky  exploratory  activities  that  offer uncertain  results  in  the  long  term  (Levinthal  &  March,  1993).  Researchers have  found  that  a  firm’s  own  operating  experience  can  lead  to  a  U-shaped relationship between experience and risk of failure, which suggests that rely-ing on one’s direct experience alone is harmful to survival to a certain degree (Ingram & Baum, 1997).Vicarious learning, in contrast, refers to “firms altering their behaviors in response to the behaviors of other firms” (Srinivasan, Haunschild, & Grewal, 2007: 18). The change in behavior occurs when the observing organizations, engaging in a bounded rational decision-making process, act as “na07ve intui-tive statisticians” to infer whether adoption of an observed practice provides a technical value to their firm (Terlaak & Gong, 2008). Strategic decisions, those that involve large resource commitments, delayed feedback, and diffi-cult adjustment focus manager’s attention externally (Lant & Hewlin, 2002). Vicarious learning, thus, is an interest-driven, selective, and calculated imita-tion  of  others’  behavior.  It  can  compensate  for  the  shortcomings  of  direct experience since others’ experience offer a more varied, more heterogeneous experience (Haunschild & Sullivan, 2002). Greater heterogeneity and more variance in the experience of a wide range of actors offer the observing orga-nizations opportunities to examine the outcomes of different actions, to detect the  correlations  between  certain  practices  and  outcomes  and  to  draw  infer-ences.  In  addition,  learning  from  others’  experience  minimizes  the  cost  of exploration and exploitation for focal firms as they focus on imitating suc-cessful practices and avoiding unsuccessful ones. Learning from others’ fail-ures,  particularly  high-profile  ones,  (as  opposed  to  others’  successes)  is especially  germane  to  organizational  learning.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that these failures can provoke public investigation for failure, deep searches for meanings,  and  as  such,  generate  a  great  impact  on  surviving  organizations regarding future strategic directions.However, learning through observation can be challenging. Organizations learn by encoding inferences from histories into routines that guide behavior (Levitt & March, 1988). As such, for vicarious learning to occur, organiza-tions must be able to select relevant referent organizations, infer the reasons for their failure, and discontinue or avoid similar practices within their own organizations. Any theory of vicarious learning from failure must account for how organizations are able to select, infer, and then implement external prac-tices. As yet, the process of vicarious learning from others’ failures has not been fully theorized. However, researchers have drawn clues from two litera-tures: failure attribution and imitation/adoption literature.Attribution  theory  (Kelley,  1967;  Weiner,  1974)  refers  to  how  people make “causal attributions” or explanations for the causes of actions and out-comes. According to Kelley (1967), causal attribution is based on judgment of  covariation.  Namely,  people  attribute  an  effect  to  one  of  the  possible causes with which it covariates closely over time. Even though there exists a significant amount of research on to what (i.e., the person, the situation, or the time) people attribute the outcomes, how they make such attributions is of more interest to us due to our process focus. Research has found that distinc-tive, salient, and visible information facilitates the attribution process since such  information  is  available,  vivid,  and  captures  attention  (Heider,  1958; Taylor & Fiske, 1978). Also, people are more likely to accept responsibility for successes than for failures, resulting in a self-serving bias (Miller, 1976; Miller & Ross, 1975). This effect has been found to persist at the organiza-tional level. Baumard and Starbuck (2005) suggested that firms find it diffi-cult to learn from their own failure experiences when there is a tendency to attribute the cause to an external source and assume that they have little con-trol over the venture. At the organizational level, additional factors, such as ambiguity  of  the  events,  may  further  complicate  the  attribution  process. Cannon and Edmondson (2005) suggested that by nature, a tremendous num-ber of organizational events are ambiguous, which conspire against making rational diagnosis of the causes of failure. Overall, visibility facilitates while ambiguity and self-serving bias impede cause attribution.The failure attribution literature explains how actors might be able to infer certain  practices’  value,  but  it  does  not  explain what  practices  they  would select  and  implement  in  their  own  operations.  Research  on  organizational imitation  and  adoption  has  suggested  that  organizations  are  motivated  to learn from others’ experience and that they selectively evaluate, imitate, and apply lessons drawn from others’ failures. Organizations can be motivated to implement lessons from others’ failures when and if they recognize the event to  be  salient  (Haunschild  &  Miner,  1997)  or  relevant  to  their  experience based  on  geographical  proximity  (Kim  &  Miner,  2007).  Also,  they  tend  to actively evaluate the applicability of the lessons and reduce the uncertainty of imitation by comparing the characteristics of failing organizations with their own, resulting in higher likelihood of trait imitations, that is, coping practices from  large  and  successful  firms  (Mezias,  Lant,  Baum,  &  Singh,  1994). Finally, complexity also plays a key role. In a study of learning in the U.S. commercial  airline  industry,  Haunschild  and  Sullivan  (2002)  found  that different  types  of  organizations  benefit  from  different  types  of  lessons. Generalists and specialists learn from different types of lessons, with general-ists benefiting more from simple information, and specialists benefiting more from  complex  information.  They  theorized  that  complex  generalists  are involved in a larger resource space, offering a broader range of products or services involving more hierarchy and more departments, and thus making it difficult to implement lessons learned throughout the organization.The proposition from the current literature, then, is that organizations might be able to learn from others’ failures if the focal organizations are able to identify and pinpoint the reasons of failure and adopt relevant practices from observation. Vicarious learning can be subject to “causal ambiguity,” where the decision mak-ers cannot relate the effects and consequences of the failure to its initial causes; it can  also  incur  complexity  during  the  implementation  process  (Ryall,  2009). Because of such difficulties, organizations may end up not learning. We contend, therefore, that attribution is only the first step in the learning process by which organizations discover, infer, and determine the causes of others’ failures. More important, the second step of the vicarious learning process is implementation, the  process  by  which  organizations  selectively  make  use  of  this  knowledge  in order to guide their own behavior. For vicarious learning to occur, both processes (attribution and implementation) must be completed.

Method
To explore this line of reasoning further, we use a historical caseCcontemporary case comparison approach to examine vicarious learning from failure. Com-parative  case  analysis  is  a  method  used  by  researchers  for  its  ability  to facilitate  theory  development  (Glaser  &  Strauss,  1967;  Siggelkow,  2001). Case  studies  can  identify  events  that  occurred  in  the  past  and  also  analyze trends and their impacts over a period of time. Our cases are uniquely suited for examining vicarious learning from failure as they involve a high-profile, industry-dominant organization (NASL) failing and the subsequent start-up of a similar organization (MLS). As Yin (2003) points out, case studies are appropriate  when  examining  ongoing  phenomena  that  are  difficult  to  separate from  contextual  factors.  Using  a  historical  case  to  examine  organizational failure allows us to consider contextual factors that may not appear relevant at the time of the event occurring.Both MLS and NASL are complex sports business entities with multiple stakeholders, representing a broad array of priorities and interests. Relevant stakeholders range from those involved in competitions, namely coaches and players, to the operational, media, and sponsorship organizations whose aims are to generate revenues. With such a diverse set of contributing stakehold-ers, it is necessary for us to denote that our focus is on the overarching league organizations and its decision makers. Sports leagues are the primary orga-nizing entity in professional sports because they provide the business partner-ship  that  connects  teams  and  conducts  competitions.  Although  leagues  can differ  greatly  on  multiple  dimensions,  they  all  share  the  belief  that  some central  decision  making  is  imperative  for  the  viability  of  a  league  (Foster, Greyser, & Walsh, 2005). By focusing on the league as the unit of analysis, we are able to more appropriately compare the two organizations and, thus, better examine our research questions. 

Data Sources
We designed our data collection strategy based on several factors. First, the research questions apply to learning about an organization (NASL) that has not been in existence for 26 years. NASL was organized in 1968 and dissolved in 1984. In addition, while MLS is currently operating, the events surround-ing  its  start-up  occurred  in  1996,  and  many  key  league  organizers,  such  as the league commissioner, have since departed. Therefore, accessing primary data  through  personal  interviews  was  determined  to  be  extremely  difficult. Also,  any  data  collected  in  this  way  would  likely  be  skewed  as  a  conse-quence of the eventual fate of NASL. We also wanted to keep the sources of data for both cases equivalent in order to aid comparison purposes. In light of these factors, we decided to collect our data from secondary sources. As the subjects of our study were high profile and under intense scrutiny from a number of outside and inside observers over an extensive period of time, an overwhelming amount of secondary data exists.With  extensive  secondary  data  sources  available,  it  was  critical  that  we conduct a planned, systematic, and comprehensive data collection strategy. Four  types  of  archival  information  were  systematically  consulted.  First,  in order to capture the key events and actions concerning the start and develop-ment of both leagues, we reviewed the American Soccer History archives and those of NASL and MLS. As stated earlier, we were mainly concerned with gathering information on overarching league issues rather than on individual teams  or  competitions.  Secondly,  major  media  publication  archives  were accessed  for  related  articles.  The  development  of  these  archives  provided extensive  data  published  on  both  league  organizations.  For  several  sources we accessed every article published on each league. We also utilized compre-hensive  histories  written  about  both.  Lastly,  for  MLS  we  directly  accessed any press releases or documents concerning its organizing actions and strate-gies. The researchers looked for descriptions of events, incidents, strategies, and interactions indicative of key concepts. To aid in data reliability, priority was given to highly reputable published sources such as Sports Illustrated, New York Times, Wall Street Journal, and the Financial Times as well as to interviews and quotes made by league executives.

Data Collection and Analysis
Data collection and analysis occurred in five steps. As stated earlier, we uti-lized  grounded-theory  techniques  by  comparing  the  facts  surrounding  the organization  of  both  leagues  and  their  similarities  or  differences  in  order  to generate properties of categories that increase their generality and explanatory power (Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Strauss & Corbin, 1990). To increase the valid-ity and reliability of the data coming from such a large number of secondary sources, we developed a document coding protocol. A team of four research assistants conducted the data collection using the protocol. Following Miles and Huberman (1994), the data were organized into a chronological account, and each data segment was coded according to its sources. This analysis pro-vided a condensed, but rich description of events. The initial data collection was conducted between July 2007 and September 2007.After the initial data were gathered, the authors undertook independent anal-yses  of  the  data  set.  Examining  the  case  data  for  both  NASL  and  MLS,  we specifically looked for answers to questions such as (a) how did NASL struc-ture itself at its start and how did this change during its lifespan? (b) What fac-tors were stated as leading to its failure? (c) How did MLS originally structure itself? (d) What has MLS done differently from NASL and what are the stated reasons for these differences? Upon completion of the independent analyses, the  researchers  met  and  assembled  themes  found  in  the  data  gathering. Interconnections in themes across cases were explored using constant compari-son  (Glaser  &  Strauss,  1967).  For  example,  key  themes  regarding  what  the leagues needed to do to be successful emerged. In addition, specific instances of critical similarities and differences between the two leagues were addressed.Once the initial set of themes was developed, the authors reviewed them carefully  referring  back  to  the  original  sources.  Similar  to  Greenwood  and Suddaby  (2006),  analysis  at  this  point  was  an  exercise  of  latent  analysis, where the researchers interpreted the data using their expertise about the sub-ject  and  the  context  within  which  the  data  were  gathered.  The  researchers subsequently engaged in additional discussions and used negative case analy-sis (Denzin & Lincoln, 2000) to expose problems such as lack of representa-tiveness and then revised the generated themes. The final step of the analysis involved  the  researchers  testing  the  validity  of  the  themes  by  interviewing three   soccer   industry   professionals   who   are   long-time   observers   and historians of MLS and NASL. This last step, coupled with the collection of additional  data  concentrating  on  events  in  the  intervening  time  period, allowed for an additional check on the validity of the themes that emerged during  the  data  analysis.  At  this  point,  the  interviews  and  discussions  that occurred were more for verification than exploration, moving from inductive to  deductive  as  our  interpretations  of  the  data  crystallized.  The  emergent themes were then used to identify extant theories and literatures that might provide a theory-based interpretation of the vicarious learning.

Case Analyses
The following section describes the critical success factors for professional soccer and the chronology of the two leagues, focusing on their similarities and  differences.  We  then  discuss  observable  incidents  of  learning  and  fail-ures to learn, focusing on the dynamics of correct learning versus failure to learn. Finally, we link these themes with a two-stage model of successful and unsuccessful vicarious learning.

Research Setting
Professional soccer is historically and currently a “second-tier” sport in America, in terms of popularity and audience demand. NASL and MLS employed vari-ous actions to grow their sport, increase its impact, and raise profits for their leagues.  For  a  new  professional  sports  league  to  be  successful,  there  are several critical success factors that a league must work toward. First, leagues have  to  obtain  a  certain  level  of  control  to  ensure  the  consistent  quality  of games. Franchise locations must be strategically placed throughout a mix of large markets and small markets so that a wide array of fans has the oppor-tunity to experience games firsthand. Leagues must also ensure consistency regarding  the  number  of  teams  in  order  to  build  intriguing  story  lines  and rivalries, which build fan interest. Second, the competition must have audi-ence appeal. The fans must feel connected to the athletes on the field, under-stand the rules of the game, and be entertained by the action. Thus, leagues generally  pay  high  salary  and  signing  fees  to  attract  star  players  to  add  to their audience appeal. Third, new professional leagues must develop favor-able television contracts. Games have to broadcast on TV to increase expo-sure, legitimize the brand, and provide a stable revenue stream to aid profitability. Fourth,  to  be  successful  in  the  long  run,  leagues  must  be  able  to  achieve financial  viability.  Start-up  leagues  are  not  immediately  profitable  due  to large upfront infrastructure costs incurred (stadiums, player salaries, training facilities, etc.) with very little revenues initially being accrued. Even teams with existing leagues may experience losses in a given year, due to factors such  as  team  performance  and  merchandise  sales.  Therefore,  in  order  to develop  a  sustainable  business  model  in  the  long  run,  owners  must  have  a strong financial backing to be able to absorb losses in the interim.The North American Soccer League was a U.S. professional soccer league started in 1968 on the heels of England’s World Cup victory and the attention brought  to  soccer  in  English-speaking  countries.  As  any  start-up,  NASL’s main task was to grow interest in its product and generate revenue. Strategies included changing rules to make competitions more appealing to the American sports culture and bringing to the United States high-profile foreign players (Newsham, 2005). For example, NASL’s highest-profile club, the New York Cosmos  owned  by  Warner  Communications,  signed  the  captain  of  West Germany’s World CupCwinning squad, Franz Beckenbauer, Italian superstar Giorgio  Chinaglia,  and,  most  famously,  the  Brazilian  phenom  Pelé,  widely considered the greatest soccer player of all time (Weiland, 2006). As a result of these efforts, the Cosmos averaged 40,000 fans per game during the late 1970s. In order to bring Pelé to the new league, the Cosmos presented him with a contract that made him the highest-paid athlete in the world, earning twice that of the highest-paid baseball player (the most popular professional sport at the time in the United States). When Pelé retired from NASL in 1977, soccer had become the fastest-growing sport on the youth, college, and pro-fessional levels in the United States (Jose, 2003; NASL, 1978). There were nearly  50,000  registered  players  in  youth  soccer  leagues  in  1967,  a  number that sky-rocketed to close to 1 million by 1977 (Miller, 1977). Despite grow-ing  participation,  the  overall  average  attendance  of  NASL  was  less  than 15,000 per club, with some clubs averaging fewer than 5,000 (Jose, 2003; NASL, 1978).  League  attendance  continued  to  decline  until  NASL  folded  in  1984. While soccer remained the world’s most popular sport, there was no profes-sional soccer in the United States for 12 years.In 1993 the U.S. Soccer Federation promised the Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) that it would establish a professional league in the United States in exchange for the opportunity to host the 1994 World Cup  (Markovitz  &  Hellerman,  2001).  This  decision  surprised  many  due  to the perceived lack of soccer interest and to NASL’s failure a decade earlier. However, the 1994 U.S. World Cup tournament boosted the highest to date attendance (U.S. Soccer, 2008). Two years later, MLS officially started play-ing in 10 cities. When MLS began it was originally positioned as the “anti-NASL”  (Trekker,  2006).  Executives  looked  to  take  a  more  conservative approach than had NASL. While many of MLS’s strategies have been per-ceived as cautious, in 2005 the league made an audacious move and signed international  soccer  superstar  David  Beckham,  to  play  for  the  L.A.  Galaxy franchise starting  in  the  2007  season.  As  a  columnist  for  the USA  Todaywrote,  “David  Beckham  coming  to  the  United  States  is  like  Tiger  Woods meeting Brad Pitt on the red carpet. This transcends sports” (Brennan, 2007). Many similarities between the signing of Beckham and the signing of Pelé have been noted. Both were the highest-paid sports figures of their time, and both were brought to the United States to generate appeal to an uninterested sports market.Three years after Beckham came to the United States, the experiment has been perceived as less successful than it was poised to be in July 2007. Even though the L.A. Galaxy enjoyed spikes in season ticket sales and the associ-ated financial success, the team suffered from three disappointing seasons in 2007,  2008,  and  2009.  In  October  2008,  the  Galaxy  signed  contracts  with A.C. Milan for Beckham to play in Italy, effectively limiting his commitment to  MLS.  Even  though  Beckham  is  a  significant  draw  for  Galaxy  games (Galaxy averaged 28,132 fans per game on the road, nearly 10,000 more than any other MLS team), the league itself only benefited slightly, with its aver-age attendance raising 6.9% to 16,459 in 2008. As for the main measure of impact for sports league, TV ratings, Beckham did not help improve MLS’s ESPN rating, drawing 0.2 ratings for his Galaxy games, the same rating for non-Beckham  MLS  broadcasts.  (This  figure  can  be  compared  to  Women National  Basketball  Association’s  rating  of  0.4  and  National  Basketball Association’s rating of 1.4.) While signing Beckham is a move similar to that employed by NASL, a deeper comparison reveals many distinct differences. The following section summarized in Table 1 outlines several areas in which MLS has differentiated itself from NASL.First, MLS was set up as a single-entity league, which means all teams are controlled by the league office, revenues are shared, and player contracts are negotiated  by  the  league  and  not  individual  teams  (Major  League  Soccer, 2008). This gives MLS a strong, centralized leadership. By having the league control  these  things,  it  attempts  to  limit  the  destructive  behavior  that  was displayed by individual owners during NASL’s expansion period and subse-quent  decline.  MLS  franchises  are  not  able  to  offer  exorbitant  contracts  to stars in attempts to outspend each other. To further help limit owner’s spend-ing, the MLS instituted a salary cap of US$2.4 million on every team (ESPN Soccernet, 2007). Another MLS change was to require each team to start a local development team or soccer academy for younger players. MLS hopes to build up U.S. soccer talent, while bridging the gap between a successful youth soccer movement and professional soccer. In addition, MLS limits the number  of  international  players  on  a  team  to  4  and  at  founding,  generally limits the number of international players in the entire league, believing that American  fans  relate  more  to  the  domestic  players  on  the  field.  MLS  has other factors in place that further enhance league appeal such as an emphasis on soccer-specific stadiums. These stadiums create authentic, soccer-friendly atmospheres and save teams the expense of leasing the stadiums, in the same way that they were rented by NASL (Major League Soccer, 2008). MLS has also  secured  long-term  television  deals  with  various  networks  such  that  all regular season matches are televised live (Mickel, 2008).However, not all these instituted differences constitute vicarious learning. If  we  look  more  closely  at  the  strategic  actions  of  MLS,  we  distinguish instances of correct learning from failure, wrongful learning, failure to learn, and noise. Figure 1 summarizes our description of the four learning scenarios experienced by MLS. Underlying these instances are the dynamics of failure attribution and lesson implementation, where success in both steps is required to generate correct learning from others’ failure. A natural starting point, there-fore, is to examine where MLS successfully achieved both.

Correct Learning From Failure: League Control
One of the most visible lessons emerging from NASL’s failure was its fast-paced, out-of-control expansion. NASL was notorious for rapid growth start-ing in 1975 when Pelé signed with the New York Cosmos. The league did not view the growth associated with Pelé as temporary, but rather as some-thing it could build upon and sustain (Yannis, 1978). During this time period, a NASL team’s projected average net income from ticket sales, concessions, Table 1. Similarities and Differences Between NASL and MLSNASLMLSOwnershipIndividual ownersSingle entity with multiple investorsLocationsOwner determinedStrategic locationsGrowthErratic, rapid growthStable, selective growthStadiumsMixed use facilitiesMoving toward soccer specificPlayersLarge numbers of internationalsHome-player rule, designated foreign playersRulesNASL specificInternational rulesMediaLimited televised matchesMixed media; Internet and television, every game broadcastCommunity relationshipsOwner dependentLeague sponsored youth development leagues in every city and TV  was  around  US$1  to  US$2  million  a  year,  comparable  to  an  NFL franchise (Miller, 1977). As the league’s appeal grew, new franchises were constantly added. For example, seven teams were added in 1978 alone. An expansion fee of 1 million dollars was charged to new owners and distributed to  owners  of  existing  teams  (Avila,  1997).  To  attract  fans,  owners  of  these new  teams  attempted  to  sign  the  best  players  possible.  “The  name  of  the game was keeping up with the Cosmos and spending lavishly―and usually not too wisely―on imported foreign stars” (Gardner, 1985). Looking back, Jack Daley, a NASL team president commented: “Too far, too fast. Our hype [was] to present the NASL as a new NFL when we weren’t ready” (Gammon, 1984). NASL team owner Lee Stern is quoted as saying, “We spent too much money trying to market teams as if they were instant big league franchises before the attendance and money justified it” (Gammon, 1984). Daley added, “It  became  fashionable  to  have  a  Pelé.  Coaches  went  around  the  world  on talent searches, forcing the prices up” (Gammon, 1984). One soccer archivist notes that based on World Soccer columnist Brian Glanville’s list of “great-est ever” soccer players, NASL owners signed at least a few of these players to compete in the United States (Litterer, 2008).Because NASL was a collection of team owners each with their own finan-cial  interest,  they  lacked  incentive  to  coordinate  their  actions.  Rather,  moti-vated by greed and the potential to achieve quick profits, they engaged in their own  activities.  With  a  general  lack  of  fiscal  responsibility,  owners  would not implement budget-control ideas brought to them by the league president Howard  Samuels.  “They’re  crazy,”  Samuels  is  quoted,  “and  they  complain about huge losses and get out of the sport” (Gardner, 1985). One such instance occurred when the league allowed an owner to move a club from Memphis to Calgary  and  fold  it  in  a  year  (Gammon,  1984).  Out-of-control  expansion proved not to be economically justified and ultimately had a major impact on NASL’s failure. The overexpansion of NASL has been covered intensively in sports media, and many soccer industry insiders have reached consensus on this disastrous expansion strategy (e.g., see Litterer, 2008).Following highly visible, clear lessons from NASL, MLS has always posi-tioned itself differently in this area, by attempting to build slowly and strate-gically with franchise locations and soccer talent. Alan I. Rothenberg, President of the United States Soccer Federation from 1990-1998, and part owner of a NASL club, was instrumental in the founding of MLS. Rothenberg stated at MLS’ start that there would be a focus on limiting owner discord and associ-ated spiraling costs:Rather than having independent team owners flaunting their wealth, investor  operators  pay  for  a  share  in  the  league.  The  arrangement should prevent disputes over shared revenues or from exploiting sal-ary cap loopholes by controlling the acquisition of players. (Lubove, 1995)With that vision, MLS decision makers were able to implement a strong, centrally  controlled  league.  “We  have  been  forced  to  create  a  system  that would allow us to make long-term decisions and fight all of the pressures to do things for today because it was the pressures to do things for today that forced the NASL out of business,” MLS’ second commissioner Don Garber was quoted as saying (Owen, 2005; italics added).The  MLS  owners  were  able  to  both  identify  with  the  commissioner’s vision and to follow his leadership. Lamar Hunt, an owner of both NASL and MLS teams, remarked, “The most important thing in this venture is that the teams will be competitive with each other. You need balance in the league” (Lubove,  1995).  Ten  years  later  that  thinking  still  prevails  as  Garber  says, “We learned that we needed strength in all markets as opposed to just a strong team in one market―NY Cosmos” (Sports Marketing Quarterly, 2005). In its first  8  years,  MLS  maintained  the  number  of  franchises  at  10  with  2  new clubs being added as 2 original clubs were dissolved. Since 2004, the league has strategically added six teams with the placement of teams in both large and small markets, aiming to appeal to fans across the country (ESPN Soccernet, 2007). Seeing the outcomes of NASL’s lack of ownership control as highly salient to their own survival, our case data indicate that MLS executives have been strongly motivated to adopt a different approach. The learning organiza-tion (MLS) identified correctly a source of failure and implemented a differ-ent strategy, focusing on slow growth and the maintenance of control.The picture, then, is that failures are accurately attributed to the right cause and the learning/recipient organization appropriately followed the precise lessons during the implementation stage. We term this process as “correct learning from failure.” This observation corroborated the importance of visibility and lack of ambiguity in the attribution process and of motivation and lack of complexity in the  implementation  process.  Ingram  and  Baum’s  (1997)  study  of  U.S.  hotel chains  found  that  organizational  failures  are  usually  salient,  well-publicized events, and the details are generally assessable through trade magazines for other surviving organizations. Kim and Miner (2007) found that in the U.S. commer-cial banking industry, banks avoid or decrease their dependence on similar strate-gies perceived to have caused failures in others. Organizations (in our case, the MLS), having correctly attributed the causes of failure in others due to visibility and low ambiguity, are able to avoid or reduce the causes in their own situations. Overall, the effects of others’ failures on the recipient organization are positive in that they enhance the recipient’s survival rate.

Wrongful Learning: Foreign Players
Sports’ biggest draw is the star power of its athletes. Fans emotionally iden-tify with stars and pay to see them on the field. As stated earlier, to improve its audience appeal, NASL brought Pelé to the New York Cosmos with a con-tract of US$4.5 million to be paid by the team over 3 years and an additional US$2.5 million to be paid by Warner Communications over 6 years. Pelé, the most transcendent athlete in the world at the time, not only helped to legiti-mize soccer in America but also raised the average home attendance figure from  3,500  in  1974  to  32,000  in  1975  (Jose,  2003).  However,  NASL  went too far to attract foreign players, evidenced by the fact that each team aver-aged only one homegrown player in 1979. Nick Owcharuk, a NASL player, commented at the time, “NASL doesn’t mean North American Soccer League, it means Non-American Soccer League” (Reed, 1979).Even though recruiting foreign players was successful in terms of increas-ing  audience  appeal  and  the  legitimacy  of  the  matches,  it  also  triggered  a euphoric spending spree by NASL team owners. NASL teams started bidding wars for aging international stars to try to match the Cosmos’ success and lost significant amounts of money in doing so. Also, with the addition of several new teams in a short period of time, there were not enough quality players or fan interest. This led some teams to fold quickly when the owners realized that they were not making money, inducing first the decline of NASL and, eventually, its collapse. NASL’s failure was not due to foreign player recruit-ment per se but to the fact that teams overspent to attract those players when the economics did not justify it. The relationship between foreign players and the failure of NASL, therefore, is not clear-cut. The intertwining events sur-rounding the league’s expansion and Pele’s retirement make the attribution process complex.

This  might  explain  why  MLS’s  commissioner  wrongfully  believed  that foreign players were a key reason for NASL failure. Rothenberg argued at the time of MLS founding:Why did the [NASL] fail? It sold short term curiosity. The novelty of seeing world-renowned imported stars soon wore off. This time around MLS will rely on the greater pool of top home-grown talent to provide local heroes for the young kids to support. (Gilbert, 1995)In its first 10 years of existence, MLS limited the number of foreign play-ers and focused mostly on domestic players. The league has kept its talent as home grown as possible in the belief that American fans can relate better to the American players on the field. This has unintended effects. For example after MLS’s startup, foreign players like David Endt of Amersterdam’s Ajax maintained,  “American  soccer  is  a  level  below  our  top  division.  No  one dreams of going to play in the U.S.” (Wolverton, 1998).As the opposite of NASL’s exuberant rush to import foreign players, the home-player rule, however, appears less relevant today when sports and media coverage  is  more  global.  Critics  have  suggested  that  limiting  international players has produced mostly uninspiring parity and a lack of exciting matches (Holmes, 2004). In the age of Fox Sports and ESPN where sports from differ-ent countries are easily available, without star power in MLS, hardcore U.S. soccer fans prefer the European Champions League and the superior leagues in England, Spain, and Mexico. Many of these fans choose to watch interna-tional matches on television, instead of attending MLS games in their areas. In addition, evidence suggests that international stars of NASL were extremely effective  in  generating  media  and  fan  interest.  Many  feel  MLS  applies  a wrong lesson (the home-player rule) from the failure of NASL, which, despite the  precise  implementation,  is  not  helpful  in  the  current  market.  Recently MLS modified its international player rule and made salary-cap exceptions to draw  international  players,  beginning  with  the  biggest  of  them  all―David Beckham. MLS commissioner Don Garber admitted that “we’ve realized we have a handful of different selling points. Multicultural is the biggest of those; there’s no debating that” (Thomaselli, 2009).Here,  incorrect  attribution  is  followed  by  precise  steps  to  follow  (the incorrectly attributed) causes to be prevented in the implementation stage. In these cases, recipient organizations replicate wrong or ineffective routines in  their  operations,  making  the  effect  of  others’  failures  on  their  learning negative.  We  term  this  situation  “wrongful  learning.”  Bounded  rationality (Simon,  1991)  and  imperfect  cognitive  representations  to  formulate  mental models  remain  barriers  to  learning  (Gavetti  &  Levinthal,  2000;  Thagard, 1996). Actors may not be able to attribute the right causes from a failure due to their own cognitive limitations. Levinthal and March argued that “learning is  likely  to  be  misleading  if  the  experiential  record  on  which  it  draws  is  a biased representation of past reality, and thus of future likelihoods” (1993, p.  104).  Lovallo  and  Kahneman  (2003)  contend  that  managers  tended  to make decisions based on “delusional optimism” rather than on rational assess-ment. Attributions based on biases, delusions, and misrepresentations are mis-takes, and precise implementation of such wrong causes could lead to problems in organizations. For example, rather than criticizing the failure of a strategy as an outright failure, recipient organizations may conclude that the failure is  not  due  to  the  strategy  but  to  insufficient  effort  to  pursue  strategy  with vigor (Chuang & Baum, 2003). If recipient organizations follow the wrong cause  and  pursue  the  strategy  in  question  with  great  effort,  they  will  likely end up failing.In  addition,  our  case  illustrates  previous  underresearched  conditions  for “wrongful learning,” such as when strict adherence to previous lessons is no longer applicable due to changes in the competitive environment. The suc-cess of vicarious learning is not only dependent on drawing the right lessons but  also  on  choosing  the  right  lessons  to  apply  to  the  focal  organizations’ existing  condition.  There  is  often  a  time  lag  between  attribution  of  others’ failures and implementation of the lessons learned. In the long run, environ-mental  conditions  may  have  significantly  changed,  making  the  previously attributed causes invalid and previously implemented strategies inappropri-ate. For instance, while a high-priced, innovative product with creative fea-tures  might  be  useful  for  the  early  stages  of  industry  development,  such  a product may be fated to fail in later, mature stages of the industry when prod-ucts are more standardized and consumers expect lower prices.

Failure to Learn: Media Relationship
NASL was unable to draw a large enough TV audience for its games. This factor  has  been  cited  as  a  contributor  to  failure  as  the  television  networks dropped their coverage, effectively limiting the league’s profile to the broad U.S. audience. More important, without substantial broadcast fees, a crucial revenue  stream  to  support  player  salaries  and  general  administration  costs was  lost.  NASL  was  immensely  aware  of  the  criticality  of  TV  coverage.  A team president noted, “Expansion and relocation was done with just one thing in mind. To cover the major TV markets. Our absolute priority is a network television  contract”  (Reed,  1978).  MLS  commissioner  and  former  NASL owner,  Allan  Rothenberg  also  mentioned  to  the Financial  Times,  “the biggest  drawback  with  the  old  NASL  was  we  couldn’t  attract  regular  TV 
coverage”  (Gilbert,  1995).  The  importance  of  TV  coverage  to  success  was widely discussed in the media, and it was a clear and visible lesson to draw from failure.MLS leaders were aware of this cause from the league’s outset and set to correct  this  strategic  issue.  However,  as  opposed  to  the  owner  control  and foreign-player issues, which offer clear actions to prevent repeating perceived NASL  mistakes,  there  was  no  direct  path  for  generating  revenue  through media  for  a  startup  league.  The  United  States’  privately  sponsored  TV  sta-tions (as opposed to BBC, the national TV network in Britain) evaluate their sports coverage deals in terms of economic profit, that is, the audience drawn and  the  advertisement  revenue  generated.  As  an  ongoing  effort  MLS  has extensively negotiated and signed deals for coverage on ESPN, ESPN2, and ABC. In addition, deals were struck with Univision, Galavision, and Telemundo to broadcast matches in Spanish. The original Univision deal lapsed after a few years, leaving only the ABC/ESPN family of networks as the league’s national  broadcasters.  Fox  Sports  World  (later  rebranded  as  Fox  Soccer Channel in 2005), Fox Sports en Espa09ol, and HDNet began airing matches in 2003. Even with this effort, it wasn’t until the 2007 season that television rights were sold to networks at a profit. Previously, MLS paid networks to broadcast its games. Network coverage, then, instead of fulfilling its role of bringing revenue to the league, was costing MLS to maintain. One argument is that MLS is addressing the surface of the problem (media coverage) and has  skipped  the  hard  work  involved  in  encouraging  local  communities  to watch  and  attend  games.  As  a  result,  an  inordinate  amount  of  time  and resources has been used to generate a broader television market without hav-ing creating the local fan interest market. Don Garber, upon taking over as commissioner of MLS in 2000, admitted that “the biggest challenge facing MLS is turning what is enormous interest in the sport into television viewers and game attendees” (Cassidy & Bronson, 2000).In this instance, even though MLS has tried to take action to improve its media coverage issues, the correction has not fulfilled the promise of revenue generation to date. We believe that this is an example of “failure to learn” in that the organization correctly identified the reasons for failure, thus complet-ing the first step of learning, but failed to implement a measure in the second step to correct the issues related to the failure. This may be commonplace in vicarious learning. While the learning organization may agree on the reasons of  failure,  when  the  time  comes  to  correct  others’  mistakes,  organizations may  end  up  either  applying  the  wrong  tactics  or  unsuccessfully  addressing the failure at a deep level. In such situations, the effect of others’ failures on one’s  own  survival  is  neutral.  There  are  several  reasons  why  incorrect implementation strategies may be pursued. Our case illustrates one barrier to implementation: complexity. Another reason might be the inactivity and iner-tia of recipient firms. For example, studies indicate that even though unpleas-ant  consequences  generally  stop  existing  behaviors,  they  do  not  stimulate efforts  for  people  to  behave  differently  (Starbuck,  Barnette,  &  Baumard, 2008). With increasing complexity in the implementation process, the correct lessons drawn from others’ failures can be drowned in myriad related factors. When there are challenges in both attribution and implementation stages, noise will happen, as discussed below. 

Noise: Financial Viability
In order to survive and be self-sufficient in the long run, a sports league has to  be  financially  viable  and  self-sustaining.  Thirty  years  ago,  NASL  failed financially. As Howard Samuels, the last NASL commissioner and the man brought  in  to  turnaround  the  struggling  league,  put  it,  “the  problem  is  not with the sport, the problem is financial” (Mifflin, 1983). On the revenue side, NASL had low-average attendance and little to no television revenues (a few teams had local TV and radio deals), and therefore, unlike other major sports, could not count on TV or sponsorship revenue to finance players’ salaries.On the cost side, the flood of expensive international stars by some major teams forced others to follow suit when they really could not afford to, which lead to the demise of several clubs. As mentioned by Lee Stern, Chairman of the NASL owners’ executive committee,when  you’ve  lost  as  much  money  as  these  clubs,  as  a  group,  have lost over the years, like any good business you would look into how to improve things. Like any good business, we’re looking at every-thing, including the league front office, to see how we can improve. (Mifflin, 1982)However,  the  exact  reason  for  failure  was  never  fully  known,  and  even people intimately involved in the center of its failure could not reach conclu-sions on why it failed to reach profitability. During its excessive growth stage, many investors thought NASL had reached the turning point toward popular-ity and profitability. Others cautioned against excessive optimism because the league was still a long way from financial stability (Mifflin, 1982). There was confusion and ambiguity up to the time of its ultimate collapse.Fast  forward  30  years,  MLS  has  lost  at  least  US$400  million  since  its founding,  according  to  a  report  by ESPN  in  2010.  League  ownership  has worked to be the anti-NASL and engaged in strategic activities to the oppo-site effect as NASL. For example, MLS leaders have attempted to increase profits  through  increased  attendance  at  matches,  raised  ticket  prices,  con-structed soccer-specific stadiums (to reduce the hefty leasing fee associated with using others’ stadium), and increased television exposure (Wahl, 2007). In 2007, MLS teams signed sponsorship deals placing company logos on the front of team jerseys. The league has implemented no shortage of strategic actions to increase profitability, but has yet to reach a point where it is self-sustaining and profitable. Despite their strong motivation to change, the com-plexity of the soccer economic model defies a clear-cut solution. Don Garber, the current commissioner of MLS, who was also an executive of the National Football League for 19 years, compared soccer to other popular sports:The league has an inverted economic model. In most other leagues in the U.S. and probably in England as well, the dominant revenue comes from television. Today the majority of our income comes from the gate. After  that  comes  sponsorship  and  television  and  then  merchandising. (Owen, 2005)To  date,  it  is  difficult  to  pinpoint  why  NASL  did  not  break  through  and fulfill  its  enormous  promise  (Litterer,  2008).  Neither  has  MLS  determined strategies that provides for its own financial success. The rise and then spec-tacular failure of NASL, in the end, becomes part of the noise that MLS execu-tives  deal  with  as  it  does  not  provide  specific  guidance  toward  achieving profitability.  This  might  be  why  the  league  appointed  Garber  with  his  NFL experience (one of the most lucrative sports leagues in the United States) to be its commissioner―to borrow relevant business expertise from another sport.The situation here is inaccurate attribution followed by imprecise imple-mentation. Here, recipient organizations either fail to find the right causes for others’ failures or fail to reach conclusions on the causes of the failures. In addition, during the implementation process, recipient organizations imple-ment unrelated strategies or take inappropriate lessons drawn from the attri-bution  process.  We  term  this  situation  “noise,”  where  there  is  no  obvious evidence  of  vicarious  learning  and  the  effects  of  others’  failures  on  one’s survival are neutral. As there usually exists significant ambiguity in organi-zational  failure,  the  recipient  organizations  could  easily  fail  to  identify  the right causes. The focal organization may also fail to recognize the relevancy of  others’  failures  to  their  operations,  thus  resulting  in  low  motivation  to adopt others’ practices.

A Process Model of Vicarious Learning
We have reported that MLS, through the processes of failure attribution and lesson implementation, was able to learn from certain practices of NASL but failed to learn from others. Using these observations, we propose a process model  of  vicarious  learning  from  failures  and  offer  insights  into  the  chal-lenges of attribution and implementation. Figure 2 illustrates our model.A  central  theme  of  our  model  is  that  failure  attribution  is  often  the  first step in the vicarious learning process. It is rarely a simple process and can be imbued with uncertainty and ambiguity. Decision makers often face issues of  limited  attention  and  high  information-search  costs  when  examining their environments to evaluate which organizations and which practices can provide valuable lessons (March & Simon, 1993). In order to infer the rea-sons for failures, they often rely on limited, fragmented, and sometimes con-fusing  accounts  from  various  actors  involved.  Visible  events  trigger  the information-search process in focal organizations (March, Sproull, & Tamuz, 1991) because these events command attention. Lack of ambiguity also aids the  cause  attribution  process  because  it  facilitates  drawing  a  clear  cause  of failure and hence paves the way for implementation. Therefore, we propose:Proposition 1: Decision makers are more likely to be able to attribute causes from others’ failures if the failures satisfy the conditions of visibility and lack of ambiguity.The  second  step  is  the  lesson  implementation  process,  where  the  focal organization corrects for others’ failures through a process of motivated, tar-geted, and focused adoption. Here the focal organizations must possess the motivation to implement the failure lessons, whether it is because the nega-tive  performance  pressure  or  the  leadership  involved.  The  implementation process needs to be targeted in that the focal organizations need to conscien-tiously evaluate whether the lessons learned are suitable for their own situa-tions.  Lastly,  the  lesson  implementation  process  might  be  hindered  if  the measures to correct for the cause are unclear and complex. This is one of our contributions to the adoption literature where organizations imitate by copy-ing or abandoning certain practices. In vicarious learning from failure, cor-recting  for  others’  mistakes  can  be  highly  complex,  intricate,  without  clear indication of which specific actions will lead to a reversal of previous failure. In a way, vicarious learning from failures has added difficulties because of such complexity. Therefore, we propose: 
Proposition  2:  Decision  makers  are  able  to  implement  lessons  from others’ failures if they are motivated to adopt, deem others’ failures relevant to their own survival, and face a less complex solution.Figure 2 shows that the result of vicarious learning is dependent on both processes  of  cause  attribution  and  lesson  implementation.  The  interaction and combination of cause attribution and lesson implementation is the focus of this article. We have shown that with success in both stages, a focal firm could effectively learn from others’ failures. When either step is in danger, the organization could end up learning the wrong practice or failing to learn. If  neither  step  is  successful,  others’  failure  will  end  up  being  noise  in  the focal organization’s environment, having a neutral effect on the focal orga-nization’s success. Therefore, we propose:Proposition 3: Successful vicarious learning from failure is a function of  accurate  cause  attribution  and  precise  lesson  implementation. Without either, successful learning could not materialize. 

Discussion, Implications, and Conclusions
Organizations are encouraged to learn from others’ failures; however, vicar-ious  learning  brings  with  it  unique  challenges.  Previous  research  (Kim  & Miner, 2007) has established the importance of vicarious learning and theo-rized  that  others’  failures  can  act  as  alternative  knowledge  sources  to  offer solutions to challenges that organizations face and display behaviors to imi-tate or avoid. Others’ failures also facilitate focal organizations to infer the causes of failure and develop useful theories and strategies to implement in their own  organizations.  Through  comparison  of  MLS  to  its  historic  predecessor Failure ofothers Cause Attribution VisibilityLack ofAmbiguity LessonImplementation Complexity Relevancy Motivation toadopt Results Correct Learningfrom FailureWrongfulLearningFailure to Learn Noise Figure 2. A two-stage model of vicarious learning from others’ failure NASL, we demonstrated that MLS is actively engaged in a variety of strate-gic  activities  intending  to  avoid  the  replication  of  NASL  failure.  However, not all these activities constitute learning from failure.We make three contributions to the vicarious learning from failure literature. First, our depiction of MLS’s effort to learn from NASL’s failure provides one of the first accounts of a motivated, selective vicarious learning effort by a com-plex organization. Previous quantitative studies have focused on vicarious learn-ing processes within various industries but mainly at industry level (Haunschild &  Sullivan,  2002;  Chuang  &  Baum,  2003).  Our  focus  on  one  organization (MLS) learning from its most relevant failed predecessor offers us the opportu-nity to examine closely the decisions, rationales, and challenges involved, which would be difficult with an industry level, quantitative analysis.Second,  we  contribute  to  the  learning  from  failure  literature  by  moving beyond the simple dichotomy of learning and failing to learn. Learning from failure does not automatically occur when focal organizations engage in strategic activities to the opposite of failing organizations. Such a view is overly sim-plistic  as  there  are  generally  complex,  ambiguous,  and  intertwined  reasons for  failure.  As  such,  bounded-rational  decision  makers  may  not  be  able  to identify  the  “true”  reasons  for  failure.  In  addition,  surviving  organizations may fail to implement precise steps to avoid the causes of failure. By propos-ing a two-stage model of vicarious learning, we move beyond the traditional dichotomy  of  learning  versus  not  learning  and  introduce  a  more  in-depth analysis of learning from failure, wrongful learning, failure to learn, and noise. We demonstrate that simple avoidance of strategy replication and engagement in opposite strategies is not enough to suggest that an organization has learned from failure. For learning to occur, organizations have to correctly attribute and infer the cause of failure as well as implement precise strategies to cor-rect for mistakes.Third, we unpack the processes by which vicarious learning from failure unfold. In so doing, we extend the organizational learning literature by under-standing  the process  of  vicarious  learning  from  failures  and  related  issues. Drawing upon attribution theory and the adoption literature, we have identi-fied  visibility  and  ambiguity  as  key  factors  affecting  cause  attribution  and motivation, complexity, and relevancy as key factors affecting lesson imple-mentation.  We  make  particular  note  of  the  lesson  implementation  process, which has received little attention in the vicarious learning literature. Being aware of and able to infer about others’ failures is a necessary but insufficient condition of vicarious learning. Learning organizations also have to be moti-vated to adopt and have the capacity to implement measures to avoid dupli-cating  others’  failures.  In  our  case,  although  MLS  was  fully  aware  of  the media’s role in NASL’s failure, the complexity to fix this issue has to date prevented effective corrections.Much  remains  to  be  done.  Our  propositions  need  to  be  examined  in other industry settings to test the generalizability of our model. The inter-twined stakeholders in professional sports distinguish it from many other industries,  where  lesson  implementation  may  not  be  as  difficult.  For instance,  in  industries  such  as  manufacturing,  where  there  are  concrete, physical end products, lesson implementation might be more straightfor-ward. Also our case explores a high-profile failure, which attracted atten-tion from a wide range of media, business, and sports outlets that rationalized about  the  causes  of  failure.  In  other  industry  settings,  there  might  not  be such a clear referent organization for the focal organization. In these cases, organizations  would  need  to  carefully  identify  relevant  learning  targets. Furthermore, our case is about a focal organization learning from another organization failing over a decade prior to its start. Even though some key decision makers were involved in both organizations, most were not. This limits the learning opportunities in terms of contact learning (e.g. learning via  face  to  face  contact).  In  our  case,  most  of  the  learning  was  based through broadcast processes such as publications, consultants, and profes-sional  associations  (Kim  &  Miner,  2007).  An  important  extension  to  the literature would be to examine vicarious learning from relatively contem-porary failures, where focal organizations have opportunities to learn not only  through  broadcast  processes  but  also  through  face-to-face  contact. Finally,  culture  might  also  influence  how  the  vicarious  learning  process develops, particularly the cause attribution stage. Our case is based in the U.S. cultural context. where failures tend to be highly publicized and much discussed by various societal constituencies, thus increasing their visibil-ity and facilitating the attribution process. In other cultural contexts where failures are frowned upon, shunned, and never discussed openly, failures become  “invisible,”  and  vicarious  learning  might  have  added  difficulties (Tjusvold & Yu, 2007).Vicarious  learning  can  play  a  critical  role  for  recipient  organizations  as they can infer the reasons for failure and try to avoid similar fates. Our study uncovers the underlying mechanisms of vicarious learning. Future research can build on our efforts to identify the moderating conditions that promote and enable, or reduce and diminish, learning from others’ failures. For exam-ple, the extent of leader involvement or the age of learning organizations may be moderating factors that aid the process. Future research might also inves-tigate the relative importance of learning from direct experience versus vicar-ious  sources.  On  occasions  where  others’  failures  may  not  provide  clear guidance for recipient organizations, they may resort to learning from their own experiences, through trial and error or deliberate experimentation. It will be useful for researchers to understand when organizations put more empha-sis  on  vicarious  learning,  whether  or  not  they  can  complement  vicarious learning with direct experience and how the lessons of both interact to guide organizational evolution. Our process model on vicarious learning from fail-ure can facilitate such future research.