Soccer schedules in Europe: an overview

Abstract 
In this paper, we give an overview of the competition formats and the schedules used in 25 European
soccer competitions for the season 2008C2009. We discuss
how competitions decide the league champion, qualification
for European tournaments, and relegation. Following Griggs
and Rosa (Bull. ICA 18:65C68, 1996), we examine the popularity of the so-called canonical schedule. We investigate
the presence of a number of properties related to successive
home or successive away matches (breaks) and of symmetry
between the various parts of the competition. We introduce
the concept of ranking-balancedness, which is particularly
useful to decide whether a fair ranking can be made. We also
determine how the schedules manage the carry-over effect.
We conclude by observing that there is quite some diversity in European soccer schedules, and that current schedules leave room for further optimizing.

Keywords Soccer 
・ Scheduling ・ Canonical schedule ・Ranking-balancedness ・ Breaks 
・ Mirroring  ・ Carry-over
effect
1 Introduction
Sports have become big business, and in Europe, the most
important sport is undoubtedly soccer. Soccer in Europe volves millions of fans, and billions of euros have been paid
for broadcasting rights, advertising, and merchandizing. Europe is also the venue for thrilling competitions as for instance the Premier League, the Primera Division, and the
Champions League, which involve the richest and most successful teams in the world. Obviously, with those amounts of
money at stake, teams want to play their matches according
to a schedule that maximizes their revenue. The relationship between the schedule and match attendance has been
discussed by e.g. Scarf and Shi (2008) and Buraimo et al.
(2009), but maximizing revenue should not be done without taking into account the fact that a competition should be
attractive, fair, practicable, and safe for anyone involved.
Finding a good schedule is not an easy challenge, as
wishes from various stakeholders (the league, clubs, fans,
TV, police, etc.) are often conflicting. Moreover, whereas a
number of constraints are common for most competitions,
many leagues have their peculiarities. For example, in the
UK, travel distances for the fans must be minimized over
the Christmas and New Year period, as reported by Kendall
(2008). In regions where the same police force is responsible for guaranteeing the safety of several local clubs, avoiding too many derbies (Kendall et al. 2010), or simultaneous home games (Goossens and Spieksma 2009) is an issue. In other competitions, multiple television companies
hold broadcasting rights and the schedule should balance
the interesting matches over the rounds for each TV station
(see e.g. Della Croce and Oliveri 2006). In The Netherlands,
Schreuder (1992) reports that the railway schedule is taken
into account when scheduling the league, to make sure that
fans of rivaling clubs do not meet when taking the train to
attend a football match. Over the last decade, sport scheduling received more attention from researchers from fields
as operations research, computer science, and mathematics.
Kendall et al. (2010) give a recent overview of the research
642 J Sched (2012) 15:641C651
Table 1 Overview of
competition formats Competition Regular stage Play-off stage
n Format Title Eur. Rel. Prom. rnds rel.
Austria 10 4RR no no no no 36 1
Belgium 18 2RR no no no yes 34 3C4
Cyprus 14 2RR yes yes yes no 26C32 3
Czech Rep. 16 2RR no no no no 30 2
England 20 2RR no no no no 38 3
France 20 2RR no no no no 38 3
Germany 18 2RR no no no yes 34 2C3
Hungary 16 2RR no no no no 30 2
Ireland 12 3RR no no no no 33 3
Italy 20 2RR no no no no 38 3
Luxembourg 14 2RR no no no yes 26 2C3
Malta 10 2RR yes yes yes no 24C28 2
Netherlands 18 2RR no yes no yes 34C40 1C3
N. Ireland 12 3RR yes yes yes yes 38 1C2
Norway 14 2RR no no no yes 26 1C2
Poland 16 2RR no no no yes 30 2C3
Portugal 16 2RR no no no no 30 2
Romania 18 2RR no no no no 34 4
Russia 16 2RR no no no no 30 2
Scotland 12 3RR yes yes yes no 38 1
Slovakia 12 3RR no no no no 33 1
Spain 20 2RR no no no no 38 3
Switzerland 10 4RR no no no yes 36 1C2
Turkey 18 2RR no no no no 34 3
Wales 18 2RR no no no no 34 2
done so far in sports scheduling, and classify the contributions according to the methodology used and the application,
where soccer turns out to be the most popular topic.
There are quite a few papers that present a solution approach for a specific soccer league in Europe: Schreuder
(1992) for The Netherlands, Bartsch et al. (2006) for Austria
and Germany, Della Croce and Oliveri (2006) for Italy, Rasmussen (2008) for Denmark, Flatberg (2009) for Norway,
and Goossens and Spieksma (2009) for Belgium. There are
also a couple of papers that try to classify sports scheduling
problems. Bartsch et al. (2006) give a survey of a number of
sports scheduling problems discussed in the literature, and
indicate what type of constraints occur. A more elaborate
classification of the various constraints involved is provided
by Nurmi et al. (2010). These authors present a framework
for a sports scheduling problem with 36 types of constraints,
modeled from various professional sports leagues, including
a set of artificial and real-world instances, with the best solutions found. Nevertheless, as far as we are aware, there is
only one paper that does not focus on the process of obtaining a solution, but instead exclusively focuses on the actual
solutions of sports scheduling problem: the schedules. Over
a decade ago, Griggs and Rosa (1996) published a short paper entitled “A tour of European soccer schedules, or testing the popularity of GK2n”. For the season 1994C1995,
they examined schedules of the highest division in 25 European soccer competitions given in Table 1. They focused on
identifying the competitions that made use of the so-called
“canonical schedule” (see Sect. 3), and found that it is used
in 16 of these competitions.
This paper can be seen as a follow-up of the work by
Griggs and Rosa (1996): we revisit the 25 competitions they
listed in 1996. These competitions still form a balanced sample of strong and weak soccer competitions in Europe. We
look at the schedules for season 2008C2009 (or the 2008
schedules for countries as Norway, where the soccer season
corresponds with the calendar year), and verify whether they
have a number of interesting properties. Thus, our goal in
this work is modest: to investigate the schedules according
to which today’s soccer competitions are being played. This
gives insights in the diversity of the presence of different
properties, and provides an answer to the question what features are apparently considered important in European soccer schedules. Notice that this type of information is usually
J Sched (2012) 15:641C651 643
not explicitly available, as the properties of a schedule often
result from compromises on meetings with members from
the association. Further, we will compare our findings with
those of Griggs and Rosa (1996) and comment on the potential of further optimizing today’s schedules. We also introduce the concept of ranking-balancedness, which compares
the number of home games played by each team after each
round, and allows to express whether a fair ranking can be
produced after each round.
In the remainder of this paper, when we discuss a competition, we mean its highest division, to which we refer as
the first division. We use n for the number of teams taking
part in a competition, and l for the number of matches between a pair of teams in a (stage of) a competition. Matches
are grouped in so-called “rounds”, meaning that they are
scheduled to be played on the same day or weekend. In
order to draw any conclusions about popular features in
a soccer schedule, it is important to consider the fixtures
as they were scheduled before the start of the season. We
got this information from websites as www.the-sports.org,
www.rsssf.com, and www.gooooal.com. These fixtures regularly differ from the order according to which the matches
are actually played. Indeed, it is not uncommon that several matches in a season are postponed because of weather
conditions, or conflicts with Champions League or Europa
League matches. In rare occasions, entire rounds are put off:
in Northern Ireland the (planned) first round was played after round 10, because of a strike of the referees (McCreary
2008).
In Sect. 2, we focus on the competition format, and the
number of teams participating. We examine the popularity of
the so-called “canonical schedule” in Sect. 3 and compare it
with the findings by Griggs and Rosa (1996). The symmetry
between the various parts of the competition, and the number of rounds between two successive encounters of each
team is the topic of Sect. 4. In Sect. 5, we look at how schedules deal with successive home (away) matches. The balancedness of home and away games is discussed in Sect. 6,
where we introduce the concept of ranking-balancedness.
Section 7 investigates to what extent the so-called “carryover effects” are balanced in the schedules of our 25 competitions. Finally, a conclusion is presented in Sect. 8.

2 Competition format
When we observe the 25 European soccer competitions in
Table 1, we notice that the number of teams taking part
varies between 10 (in Switzerland, Austria, and Malta) and
20 (in Italy, France, Spain, and England). The most popular number of teams is 18; no competition is played with
an odd number of teams. A larger or more populated country does not necessarily have more teams in its competition
(e.g., The Netherlands have two teams more than Russia),
but stronger competitions according to the UEFA League
ranking tend to have more teams. The number of teams occasionally changes, for instance when competitions choose
a new format. Compared to the season 1994C1995, when
Griggs and Rosa (1996) made their survey, five competitions
increased their number of teams by two (namely, Cyprus,
Italy, Luxembourg, Norway, and Scotland). On the other
hand, five competitions decreased their number of teams by
two (England, Poland, Portugal, Switzerland, and Wales),
and Northern Ireland even went from 16 to 12 teams.
All national soccer championships in Europe consist for
the main part (if not fully) of a round robin tournament.
A round robin tournament is a tournament where all teams
meet all other teams a fixed number of times. In 19 of the 25
competitions we investigated, a double-round robin tournament is played (i.e., each team meets each other team twice).
Slovakia, Scotland, Northern Ireland, and Ireland have a
triple-round robin tournament; in Austria and Switzerland,
the competition consists of a quadruple-round robin tournament.
In five of the competitions, the regular stage of the competition is followed by a play-off stage. Notice that it is not
clear from the beginning of the season which teams will
take part in the play-off stage, since this depends on their
performance in the regular stage. Consequently, no play-off
schedule can be made in the beginning of the season. The
goal of this play-off can be to decide the league champion,
to decide qualification for European tournaments (Champions League or Europa League), to claim promotion, or to
avoid relegation. In Northern Ireland, Scotland, Cyprus and
Malta, a play-off stage determines which team is the league
champion, and which teams qualify for Europe. In Northern
Ireland and Scotland, the play-off stage consists of a singleround robin tournament, played with the best six teams from
the regular stage. In Cyprus and Malta, the play-off stage
is a double-round robin tournament with the best four and
six teams, respectively, from the regular stage. Teams take
the points they collected in the regular stage with them to
the play-offs, except in Malta, where they keep only half of
these points. In the Netherlands, the league champion is decided after the regular stage, but the teams ranked six till
nine take part in a play-off to compete for the final Europa
League ticket. The format is a direct knock-out tournament,
where the confrontations are decided by a so-called best of
three legs. We make a distinction between promotion playoffs and relegation play-offs: the latter is contested solely
between teams from first division, in the former, at least
one team from the second division takes part. All competitions organize their promotion play-off in a direct knockout format, except for Belgium, where a double-round robin
tournament is organized. A relegation play-off is less common, but occurs in Northern Ireland and Scotland (singleround robin tournament with the six lowest-ranked teams),
644 J Sched (2012) 15:641C651
Cyprus and Malta (double-round robin tournament with the
four lowest-ranked teams). In all relegation play-offs, teams
keep their points from the first stage, except in Malta, where
only half of the points is carried over. Notice that a promotion and a relegation play-off do not exclude each other: in
Northern Ireland, the one but last from the relegation playoff gets a second chance in the promotion play-off.
Clearly, the differences in league format and number of
teams, result in a different number of matches played per
team in different competitions. The one but last column in
Table 1 shows the number of league matches a team plays
during one season for each of the 25 competitions. In some
competitions, the number of matches played by a team depends on which play-off, if any, it qualifies for. On average,
a team plays 33.46 matches in a season. However, in Cyprus,
a team’s season can be finished after 24 games, whereas
a team from The Netherlands may have to contest no less
than 40 league games. Notice that we did not take into account the matches for the promotion play-off, because they
are in general not between first division teams, and organized by the association of second division teams. Although
most competitions have a tie-breaker like goal difference or
head-to-head results, in some competitions one or more “test
games” are needed to decide in case two teams end up with
the same number of points. In the season 2008C2009, this
happened in Malta, where relegation was settled in a single
test game between Msida St. Joseph and Tarxien Rainbows
(which ended in a penalty shootout), and in Belgium, where
Standard collected the league title in a thrilling two leg confrontation against Anderlecht.
The last column in Table 1 shows that none of the 25
competitions is a closed competition, since at least one team
from the second division promotes to the first division at
the end of the season. Romania catches the eye with a guaranteed promotion for four second division teams. Also in
Belgium, up to four teams could be relegated at the end of
the season 2008C2009, but this was a once-only event, since
the Belgian soccer association decided to reduce the league
to 16 teams in the next season. Ireland has a similar story:
since the competition shrinks from 12 teams in 2008 to 10
in 2009, it has been decided that exceptionally, three teams
will be relegated. On the other hand, in Wales, there was
only one team being relegated instead of two as prescribed
by the competition format, the reason being that Aberaman,
the second division champion, was barred from promotion.
In eight competitions, the number of teams being relegated
is not fixed, but depends on the outcome of the promotion
play-off.

3 The canonical schedule
In this section, and the rest of the paper, we focus on the regular stage of the competition. Rasmussen and Trick (2008)
define a schedule as “compact” or “temporally constrained”
when the number of rounds used is minimal. In the case of
an even number of teams, this means that every team plays
on every round. When more rounds are used than needed,
we say the schedule is “(temporally) relaxed”. Griggs and
Rosa (1996) point out that the schedules of Russia and The
Netherlands are relaxed. They quote geographical considerations to explain the schedule in Russia, but are surprised by
the Dutch schedule, for which they unsuccessfully tried to
complete the rounds with games played on separate “irregular” dates. Currently, however, all leagues follow a compact
schedule.
Given a single-round robin tournament with an even
number of n teams, a schedule can be seen as a onefactorization of Kn, the complete graph with n nodes. The
nodes in this graph correspond to the teams, and an edge
between two nodes represents a match between the two corresponding teams. A one-factorization of Kn is a partitioning into edge-disjoint one-factors Fi with i = 1,...,n 61 1.
A one-factor is a perfect matching, i.e., a set of edges such
that each node in the graph is incident to exactly one of these
edges. Each one-factor corresponds to a round in a compact
schedule and represents n/2 matches. One-factorizations
are a popular research topic, dating back to, as far as we
are aware, a paper by Kirkman (1847). Notice that a onefactorization does not necessarily impose an order of the
one-factors; if an order is fixed, we call it an ordered onefactorization. Notice also that a one-factorization does not
specify which team has the home advantage in a given match
(see Sect. 5).
There are many ways to construct a one-factorization
(see e.g., Mendelsohn and Rosa 1985), but undoubtedly,
the most popular method is the so-called “canonical onefactorization”, also known as GK2n. According to Mendelsohn and Rosa (1985), this method is at least a century
old, and can be found in most textbooks on graph theory.
The canonical one-factorization has its one-factors Fi for
i = 1,...,n 61 1 defined as
Fi =
(n,i)
∪
(i + k,i 61 k) : k = 1,...,n 61 1
 (1)
where the numbers i + k and i 61 k are expressed as one of
the numbers 1, 2,...,n 61 1 (mod n 61 1) (De Werra 1981).
Schedules that consist of rounds with pairings of the teams
as described in the canonical one-factorization (possibly
with a different ordering of the rounds than the regular ordering F1,F2,...,Fn611), are called canonical schedules. One
particular ordering, namely F1,F3,...,Fn611,F2,F4,...,
Fn612, results in a schedule known as the Berger pairing table, which is not uncommon in chess tournaments.
Before we can evaluate the popularity of the canonical
schedule, we need to solve a recognition problem: given a
schedule, is it canonical? Notice that given two rounds, corresponding to the one-factors F1 and F2, and the team that
J Sched (2012) 15:641C651 645
Table 2 Symmetry schemes Mirroring 1 2 3 . . . n 61 1 1 2 3 ... n 61 2 n-1
French scheme 1 2 3 . . . n 61 1 2 3 4 ... n 61 1 1
English scheme 1 2 3 . . . n 61 1 n 61 1 1 2 ... n 61 3 n 61 2
Inverted scheme 1 2 3 . . . n 61 1 n 61 1 n-2 n-3 . . . 2 1
Table 3 Overview of canonical
schedules, symmetry and
separation
Competition Canonical Eql parts Intact rnds Symmetry s
Austria yes (yes) yes yes English+English 1
Belgium no (yes) yes yes Mirror 17
Cyprus yes (yes) yes yes Mirror 13
Czech Rep. no (yes) yes yes French 14
England no (no) no yes None 6
France no (no) yes yes French 18
Germany no (yes) yes yes Mirror 17
Hungary yes (yes) yes yes Mirror 15
Ireland no (yes) yes yes Mirror 11
Italy no (no) yes yes Mirror 19
Luxembourg yes (yes) yes yes French 12
Malta yes (yes) yes yes Mirror 9
Netherlands no (no) yes yes None 9
N. Ireland yes (no) yes yes Mirror 11
Norway no (yes) yes no None 5
Poland no (yes) yes yes Mirror 15
Portugal yes (yes) yes yes Mirror 15
Romania yes (yes) yes yes Mirror 17
Russia yes (no) yes yes French 14
Scotland no (no) yes no None 5
Slovakia yes (yes) yes yes Mirror 11
Spain yes (yes) yes yes Mirror 19
Switzerland yes (no) yes yes Mirror+Inverted 1
Turkey yes (yes) yes yes Mirror 17
Wales no (no) no yes None 1
plays the role of n in (1), we can easily construct the other
one-factors according to (1). Therefore, given a schedule,
it suffices to check, for each pair of rounds taking the role
of F1 and F2, and each team taking the role of n, whether
the given schedule corresponds with the resulting canonical
schedule, in order to decide whether the given schedule is
canonical.
Griggs and Rosa (1996) found that for the season 1994C
1995, 16 of the 23 compact schedules they examined were
based on a canonical 1-factorization. By the season 2008C
2009, this number decreased to 13. The second column
in Table 3 shows whether or not a competition uses the
canonical schedule; between brackets, the situation in 1994C
1995 is given. We point out that in Austria and Switzerland, the order of the rounds differs from the order as prescribed in (1). The canonical schedule was abandoned in
the Czech Republic, Poland, Ireland, Belgium, Germany,
and Norway. We know that the introduction of mathematical programming played an important role in this change
for the latter three competitions (see Bartsch et al. 2006;
Goossens and Spieksma 2009; Flatberg 2009). Indeed, for
schedulers that rely on a manual approach, the canonical
schedule forms a familiar reference. On the other hand, the
canonical schedule was introduced in Russia, Switzerland,
and Northern Ireland; in the latter two competitions, this
went together with a change of competition format. Thus,
we conclude that the popularity of the canonical schedule
still holds, over a decade after the survey by Griggs and Rosa
(1996).

4 Symmetry and separation
When focusing on the regular stage of the competition, we
notice that most schedules can be split into equal parts, such
that each part forms a single-round robin tournament. The
646 J Sched (2012) 15:641C651
third column of Table 3 shows that this is the case in all
competitions except for England and Wales. Swapping two
rounds, however, would be sufficient to create equal parts in
these two competitions as well. In general, matches that are
grouped in a round in one part, are also grouped in the same
round in the other parts of the competition. Exceptions to
this rule are Norway and Scotland, as shown in the fourth
column of Table 3.
Usually, there is some symmetry between the order of
the rounds in the various parts of the competition (see Table 2). In most competitions (15 out of 25, including a.o.
Germany, Italy, and Spain), the second half of the competition is identical to the first, except that the home advantage
is inverted. In case of a third part, as in Northern Ireland and
Slovakia, the schedule for the first part is copied. This system is called mirroring. Another possibility is the so-called
French scheme, where matches in the first and the last round
are identical, as well as matches in round n611+t and round
t + 1 with t = 1, 2,...,n 61 2 (again with the home advantage inverted). Apart from France, this scheme is used in
Luxembourg, Russia, and the Czech Republic. In the English scheme (Drexl and Knust 2007), the opponents of the
first round of the second part are the same as in the last round
of the first part, and round n + t in the second part corresponds to round t in the first part, for t = 1, 2,...,n 61 2.
Strangely enough, the English system is not used in England, but in Austria, between the first and the second, and
between the third and the fourth part (there is no relation between the second and the third part). The Swiss competition
consists of four parts, where the first two are mirrored, and
the final two follow an inverted scheme, meaning that the
rounds of the third part are repeated in reverse order in the
fourth round.
In five competitions (England, The Netherlands, Norway,
Scotland, and Wales), none of the above symmetry schemes
is used. The schedule in Wales is, however, very close to the
English scheme: swapping round 17 with round 19 would
be sufficient. Symmetry schemes are generally perceived as
a way to add fairness to the schedule, since they insert a considerable number of rounds between two meetings of most
pairs of teams. Indeed, meeting an opponent twice in a short
timespan would be advantageous when this opponent is
weakened by injuries or low morale because of a losing run.
However, symmetry schemes also limit the options, when
numerous wishes of various stakeholders need to be satisfied as well. In those competitions, a separation constraint
can be used when creating the schedule, enforcing that
there should be at least s rounds between two games with
the same opponents (see e.g., Rasmussen and Trick 2008;
Bartsch et al. 2006). The final column in Table 3 shows the
minimal number of rounds between two matches with the
same opponents. Since for mirrored schedules, there are exactly n 61 1 rounds between all matches with the same opponents, s = n 61 1. The French scheme results in s = n 61 2,
however, for the English and the inverted scheme, s = 1, because the last round of the first part corresponds with the
first round of the second part.

5 Breaks
Forrest and Simmons (2006) show that scheduling of home
games consecutively has a negative impact on attendance.
Therefore, it is desirable for each team to have a perfect
alternation of home and away games. Since in any round
robin schedule for an even number of teams this can be
achieved for at most two teams, most teams will have a series of two successive home games, or two successive away
games, which we call a “break”. In many competitions, it
is an important consideration to have a low total number of
breaks, and that a team does not have two (or more) successive breaks, meaning that it should not have more than
two successive home (away) games. The minimal number
of breaks for a single-round robin tournament with an even
number of teams is n 61 2 (De Werra 1981). More in particular, De Werra (1981) shows that this can be achieved in
an ordered canonical schedule as follows: an edge (i,n) has
team i as the home side if i is odd, and team n as the home
side if i is even. Further, an edge (i + k,i 61 k) has i + k as
the home side if k is odd; i 61 k is the home side if k is even.
For a double-round robin tournament, a schedule with
2n 61 4 breaks can easily be constructed from a single-round
robin schedule with a minimal number of breaks by using
the inverted scheme. If we want a mirrored double-round
robin schedule, the minimal number of breaks is 3n 61 6,
and if n = 4, this can be achieved without a team having
successive breaks (De Werra 1981). However, if there is no
need for a schedule that consists of consecutive single-round
robin tournaments, we can limit the number of breaks to
n 61 2, even if all teams meet each other team more than
twice. This is illustrated for a double-round robin tournament with six teams in Table 4, where rounds 1, 4, 5, 8, and
9 form a single-round robin tournament with n 61 2 breaks.
Sometimes, competitions prefer to equally distribute the
breaks over the teams, although the minimum number of
breaks then increases to n for a single, and 2n for a doubleround robin tournament (De Werra 1980). This type of
schedule is called an “equitable schedule”. Starting from an
equitable single-round robin schedule, the French scheme is
a way to create an equitable double-round robin schedule.
The second column in Table 5 shows the number of
breaks in each competition, followed by (between brackets)
the ratio of this number of breaks and the minimal number of breaks of a schedule that consists of l single-round
robin tournaments (i.e., l(n 61 2)). No competition has a
schedule where the number of breaks is minimal, but most
schedules do not exceed the minimal number of breaks with

Table 4 A double-round robin
schedule for six teams with
n 61 2 breaks
R1  R2  R3  R4  R5  R6  R7  R8  R9  R10
A-B B-A E-B B-E A-F F-A B-C C-B B-F F-B
C-D D-C A-D D-A B-D D-B A-E E-A D-E E-D
E-F F-E C-F F-C E-C C-E D-F F-D A-C C-A

Table 5 Overview of breaks
and balancedness Competition  Breaks Max series Per team Begin End |i,R| (k) g
Austria 52 (1,63) 3 3C8 yes no 0 (3) 2
Belgium 48 (1,50) 2 0C3 no no 0 (2) 2
Cyprus 36 (1,50) 3 0C3 yes no 0 (2) 2
Czech Rep. 32 (1,14) 2 2C2 no no 0 (2) 2
England 130 (3,61) 2 5C8 no no 0 (1) 1
France 40 (1,11) 2 2C2 no yes 0 (2) 2
Germany 48 (1,50) 2 0C3 no no 0 (2) 2
Hungary 42 (1,50) 2 0C3 no no 0 (2) 2
Ireland 54 (1,80) 2 0C6 no no 1 (2) 2
Italy 66 (1,83) 2 0C4 no no 0 (2) 2
Luxembourg 32 (1,33) 4 2C4 yes no 2 (3) 3
Malta 24 (1,50) 3 0C3 no yes 0 (2) 2
Netherlands 116 (3,63) 2 4C9 no no 0 (3) 2
N. Ireland 70 (2,33) 5 0C13 yes no 2 (6) 5
Norway 28 (1,17) 2 0C3 no no 0 (2) 2
Poland 56 (2,00) 4 3C7 yes no 0 (4) 3
Portugal 42 (1,50) 2 0C3 no no 0 (2) 2
Romania 48 (1,50) 2 0C3 no no 0 (2) 2
Russia 32 (1,14) 2 2C2 yes yes 0 (2) 2
Scotland 84 (2,80) 2 6C10 no yes 1 (3) 3
Slovakia 50 (1,67) 3 0C5 yes no 1 (2) 2
Spain 54 (1,50) 2 0C3 no no 0 (2) 2
Switzerland 44 (1,38) 2 0C6 no no 0 (2) 2
Turkey 48 (1,50) 2 0C3 no no 0 (2) 2
Wales 94 (2,94) 4 1C10 yes yes 2 (4) 4

more than 50%. In five competitions however, the number of breaks seems irrelevant, as they use over twice as
many breaks as needed. Urrutia and Ribeiro (2006) show
that a large number of breaks, and successive breaks, can
be advantageous to minimize travel distances. Whereas this
could be a motivation for the high number of breaks England, it is questionable whether this explains the situation in
The Netherlands, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The
third column in Table 5 shows the maximal number of consecutive home (away) games for each competition. In most
competitions, no team plays more than two home (away)
matches in a row. Exceptions are Luxembourg, Poland, and
Wales (4) and Northern Ireland, where Cliftonville found
five consecutive home games on its schedule (a welcome
compensation for a start with six away games in the first
eight rounds).
The fourth column of Table 5 gives the minimal and
maximal number of breaks per team for each competition.
Clearly, the various leagues have a very different assessment of the importance of an equal number of breaks. Most
competitions choose for mirroring, which leads not just to
more breaks than necessary in general, but also to an uneven distribution of the breaks: two teams without breaks,
three breaks for all other teams in a double-round robin tournament. France, Russia and the Czech Republic opt for an
equitable schedule, whereas in Wales and Northern Ireland,
the difference in number of breaks between two teams can
be huge. The fifth and sixth column show that less than one
third of the leagues has a team that starts with two away
games (or two home games). A similar observation can be
made for the last two rounds: in 80% of the competitions,
a break in the final round is avoided. A traditional argu-
648 J Sched (2012) 15:641C651
ment is that the first matches set the tone for the following
to come, and thus starting with two away games could be
disadvantageous. Similarly, concluding the season with two
home games could present a decisive advantage for teams
still in the running for the league title or relegation. In Russia and Wales, these considerations are not relevant, since
their competitions allow breaks both on the second and on
the last round.

6 Balancedness
For reasons of fairness, it may be desirable that each team
plays approximately half of its games at home, and the
other half away. For each team i, we denote the number
of home (away) games played after round r as hi,r (ai,r).
Moreover, we define i,r as the difference between home
games and away games played by team i after round r, i.e.
i,r = hi,r 61 ai,r. Knust and v. Thaden (2006) call a schedule balanced if for each team, the numbers of home and
away games played at the end of the season, differ by at most
one, or if |i,R|  1, where R is the final round. They also
show that a balanced home-away assignment always exists.
Nurmi et al. (2010) call a schedule k-balanced if the number
of home and away games for each team differ by at most k
after each round of the tournament. In other words, k corresponds to the maximal value for |i,r| over all teams i and
rounds r.
The eighth column in Table 5 shows the values for |i,R|;
between brackets the value for k is given. It is striking that
three competitions do not have a balanced schedule according to the measure by Knust and v. Thaden (2006): Luxembourg, Northern Ireland, and Wales. In these competitions, a team finished the competition with two home games
more than another team. In Slovakia, Ireland, and Scotland,
there are teams that end the competition having played one
home game more than some other teams. This is, however,
inevitable since a triple-round robin tournament (with an
even number of teams) is played in these competitions. In
Scotland, this is compensated in the play-off stage, a singleround robin tournament that offers the possibility for an extra home game for those teams that were at a disadvantage
in the regular stage. Throughout the season, the difference
between home and away games exceeds two at some point
in almost all competitions. As mentioned before in Sect. 5,
Cliftonville (Northern Ireland) played six away games in the
first eight rounds; nevertheless they ended the regular stage
having played two more home games than away games.
Another concern is to have a league table that offers a
fair ranking after each round. Given the advantage that a
home game offers, this would be the case if the number of
home games played by each team after each round is as balanced as possible. Since, as far as we are aware, no measure
takes this into account, we introduce the concept of rankingbalancedness. We call a schedule g-ranking-balanced, if after each round, the difference between the number of home
games played by any two teams up till then is at most g, or
more formally if for each round r
max
i
(hi,r) 61 min
j
(hj,r)  g. (2)
It is trivial to show that a schedule with g = 0 does not
exist. Therefore, the most balanced schedule has g = 1,
meaning that after each round, a team played at most one
home game more or less than any other team. Rankingbalancedness measure is related to the balancedness as defined by Knust and v. Thaden (2006), but distinct. Indeed,
k-balancedness focuses on the difference between home and
away games for a team, whereas g-ranking-balancedness
deals with the difference in number of home games played
between teams after a round. The value for g for each competition is given in the final column of Table 5, and differs
from k for several schedules. In most competitions, the difference in number of home games played between teams
is small (g = 2), with Wales (g = 4) and Northern Ireland (g = 5) as exceptions. England has the most rankingbalanced competition, which is surprising, since the schedule of this league has not displayed much structure until
now. The Premier League is, however, the only competition
where the difference in home games played between any two
teams is never more than one.

7 The carry-over effect
Any schedule for a round robin tournament involves an order
in which each team meets its opponents. We say that a team
i gives a carry-over effect to a team j , if some other team t’s
game against i is followed by a game against team j . This is
particularly relevant in physical, body-contact sports. For instance, if team i is a very strong, tough-playing side, one can
imagine that its opponent, team t, is weakened by injuries or
fatigue, which could be an advantage for its next opponent,
team j . Moreover, the carry-over effect could also be relevant in a strictly psychological interpretation, when team t
loses confidence and morale after a severe loss against the
strong team i, again to the benefit of their next opponent,
team j . The opposite may be true if team i is a weak team.
Clearly, carry-over effects are unavoidable in any schedule,
but schedules can differ in the extent to which carry-over effects are balanced over the teams. We define cij as the number of times that team i gives a carry-over effect to team j
in a schedule. These values can be seen as the elements of
matrix C, which we call the carry-over effects matrix. The
degree to which the carry-over effects are balanced is typically measured by the so-called carry-over effects value,

Table 6 Schedule (a) and its carry-over effects matrix (b) for a singleround robin tournament with six teams
12345
ACF BDE
BEDACF
CAEF BD
DF BEAC
EBCDF A
F DACEB
(a)
013010
001310
000113
300011
111101
130010
(b)
Table 6 shows an example of a schedule for a singleround robin tournament with six teams (a), and the corresponding carry-over effects matrix (b). For instance, c41,
the number of times that team D gives a carry-over effect
to team A, equals 3, since it happens three times that A’s
opponent played against team D in the previous round. Notice that according to Russell’s definition, the carry-over effect from the last round to the first is also counted, although
of course in practice this is meaningless. The carry-over effects value for this schedule is 60, which is actually minimal (Russell 1980).
The lowest carry-over effect value we may hope for in
a single-round robin tournament with n teams is n(n 61 1).
This is the case when all non-diagonal entries of C equal 1,
and the diagonal entries equal zero. A schedule that achieves
this is called a balanced schedule. Russell (1980) presents
an algorithm that results in a balanced schedule when n is a
power of 2. For other values of n, the best known results are
by Anderson (1999). It is not hard to see that the canonical
schedule results in the maximal carry-over effect value.
We investigate to what extent soccer schedules in Europe manage to balance carry-over effects. We compute the
carry-over effects value for the first n 61 1 rounds of the regular stage of each competition. For most competitions, these
n611 rounds form a single-round robin tournament. Figure 1
represents the carry-over effects value of each competition
on a scale where 0% (100%) represents the best (worst)
known result for a single-round robin tournament with n
teams. The carry-over effects value is given between brackets. The competitions with the best balanced carry-over effects are those whose schedules do not present much of the
structure discussed in the previous sections, namely England, Italy, Ireland, Scotland, and The Netherlands. It is also
remarkable that swapping a couple of rounds of a canonical
650 J Sched (2012) 15:641C651
schedule, as was done in Austria and Switzerland, can drastically reduce the unbalancedness of the carry-over effects.
Unbalanced carry-over effects are regularly used in the
media to explain the outcome of a competition. This happened e.g. for the league title of Brann Bergen in Norway
(Flatberg 2009), and the relegation of Beveren in Belgium
(Geril 2007), in seasons when both competitions were using
the canonical schedule. In fact, in these competitions, unbalanced carry-over effects played an important role in the decision to quit using the canonical schedule. Recently, however, Goossens and Spieksma (2011) measured the influence
of carry-over effects using a dataset of over 10,000 matches
from Belgium’s first division. They find that the influence
of carry-over effects on the result and the goal difference
of a match is negligible, and conclude that a schedule with
unbalanced carry-over effects does not cause a significant
(dis)advantage for any team.
8 Conclusion
In this paper, we presented an overview of the competition
formats and schedules used in 25 European soccer competitions for the season 2008C2009. All competitions use a
round robin tournament in the regular stage; in five competitions this stage is followed by a play-off stage that decides the league title, qualification for European tournaments, and/or relegation. The number of teams in the competition, and the number of rounds varies considerably. All
competitions are open, guaranteeing at least one second division team to promote to the first division; in eight competitions the number of teams to be relegated is not fixed.
Perhaps surprisingly, 14 years after the Griggs and Rosa
(1996) investigation, it turns out that the canonical schedule
is still popular, as it is used in more than half of the competitions. The canonical schedule, however, results in the most
unbalanced carry-over effects, and this has been the reason
for at least two competitions to abandon it, although shuffling the rounds of the canonical schedule can already be
quite effective to reduce the carry-over effects value. Minimizing the number of breaks is not the most important objective when creating a schedule. Indeed, over half of the
competitions opts for a mirrored schedule, which uses 50%
more breaks than needed. Further, the vast majority of the
competitions prefers to have at least five rounds between two
matches between the same teams. In general, however, the
number of breaks is limited, teams rarely have two consecutive breaks. The Premier League is the only competition
where a ranking-balanced schedule is used, although the total number of home games played after every round for each
team does not differ by more than two in most other competitions.
In conclusion, if we look at the properties present in
the 25 schedules in our overview, we can say that there
is a considerable diversity. Moreover, the popularity of the
canonical schedule shows that there is still potential when it
comes to optimizing soccer schedules. Indeed, the number
of canonical schedules is quite small compared to the total
number of feasible schedules. There is, however, a trend to
abandon the canonical schedule in competitions where more
advanced scheduling techniques are introduced. Therefore,
we would not be surprised if only a small minority of the
competitions will still be using the canonical schedule in another 14 years.
