
Coming to America: Historical Ontologies and United States Soccer

Abstract
In January 2007, English international soccer star David Beckham announced to a global media that he would be leaving the Spanish giants Real Madrid to join Major League Soccer's (MLS) Los Angeles Galaxy. MLS Commissioner Don Garber feted Beckham as a global sporting icon whose presence attested to America's gradual transformation into a ‘Soccer Nation.’ However, following LA Galaxy's acquisition, a debate surrounding soccer's previous failure to compete at the highest echelons of American professional sport reappeared. Academic and journalistic commentators identified a number of obstacles―historical, socioeconomic and ideological―that have prevented soccer from gaining a foothold in the United States sporting market and therein becoming a credible adversary to the holy trinity of Gridiron Football, Baseball, and Basketball. This article, drawing upon Ian Hacking's prescriptions for Historical Ontology (2002) and thereby foregrounding issues of identity and power, seeks to analyse the impediments that have marked soccer's development in the United States and that led to the recruitment of Beckham as the sporting celebrity-cum-commercial juggernaut intended to bring MLS to the attention of a mass audience―variegated in terms of class, ‘race,’ and gender―so coveted by leaders of the organisation.

Key Words: Soccer identity power historical onto logy gender  ethnicity immigration


The five-year deal agreed to by the LA Galaxy and Beckham, which guaranteed the player an estimated annual salary of $10 million, was the most lucrative contract in American soccer history (CitationWalsh 2007). The monies involved led commentators around the globe to ponder the implications of United States soccer attracting the quintessential sporting superstar: a man who, by deftly negotiating the nebulous boundaries of the sports-entertainment complex, has successfully extrapolated the narrative of mass, ‘crossover’ commercial appeal previously forged by sporting figures such as basketball icon Michael Jordan (CitationLafeber 1999; CitationSmart 2005; CitationRojek 2001; CitationLim 2005). Indeed, Beckham has admitted that he adopted the number 23 at LA Galaxy ‘in honour’ of the number that adorned the jersey of the former basketball star (CitationVeseth 2005). MLS's capturing of Beckham was thus in tune with the value the corporate world places on the capacity of high profile sporting figures to, in Smart's words, “add an aura of authenticity to brands and products” (2005: 104). His role was viewed by MLS as that of a ‘Soccer Ambassador,’ which chimed with the player's move toward the post-career ‘Beckham-brand’ identity. Because MLS seemed to have plateaued in terms of attendance figures and TV viewership, Beckham was evidently introduced to take United States soccer to ‘the next level’ (CitationPringle 2004; CitationLongman 2007).

Here we ask: how did America's professional soccer league come to identify Beckham with an opportunity to ‘sell’ soccer to the American populace? More specifically, how can we diagnose the issues to which ‘brand Beckham’ was hailed as an ideal solution? In answering these questions, we privilege issues surrounding identity and are sensitive to the workings of power throughout history, as conceptualised by CitationHacking (2002). These methodological touchstones should be outlined briefly.

Historical ontology: Power, time, and place
Hacking's approach, which he has named historical ontology, provides a schema that (we think) allows us to consult the historical record with the appropriate questions. Without becoming lofty and abstract, it is important to note that historical ontology is as much a philosophical commitment as it is a set of methodological prescriptions. As the name implies, it is concerned with possible ways of being at different moments in time and allows for an examination of “how various concepts, practices, and corresponding institutions, which we can treat as objects of knowledge, at the same time disclose new possibilities for human choice and action” (CitationHacking 2002: 5). Hacking argues that “we constitute ourselves at a place and time, using materials that have a distinctive and historically formed organization” (ibid.: 3). Drawing heavily on the work of French philosopher Michel Foucault, Hacking is sensitive to the issues of knowledge, power, and subjectivation―factors that shape the formation of identity in a given historical and geographical setting.

Adopting a Foucauldian notion of power, Hacking doesn't see forms of power as exerted by identifiable agents or authorities in the form of measures aimed at the exclusion or repression of passive recipients. This isn't to say that any one person or group cannot dominate another, but it means that authorities rely on the other terms in a power relation and includes those controlled and criminalised for mutual support and engagement, whether witting or unwitting. Therefore, power operates through unowned configurations participated in by people “on the ground,” or, as Foucault called it, “power through which we constitute ourselves as subjects acting on others” (1976: 351). In this way, Foucault disapproved of attempts to uncover the overall strategy of individual people or institutions. He was interested in the immediate, short-term, professional, and political tactics of those considered to be experts, specialists, and technocrats, and how the cumulative effects of their efforts create new (or reinforce existing) possibilities for being. These included not just possibilities for people's own sense of being but also those possibilities that see certain names, ideas, and kinds of people emerge at particular moments in history.

Applied to what follows, we seek to investigate how possibilities for self-constituting can empower some (at the expense of others) and ask how the anonymous power of discourse can feature in specific processes of subject formation. It is according to these prescriptions that we engage with the history of United States soccer. In doing so, we hope to show how the identities available to participants and consumers of soccer in the United States have been shaped by specific formations of knowledge and power, bound up with specific historical processes. This array of identities will ideally point to the dimensions of a problem to which Beckham―with his attendant media-commercial complex―has been identified as a viable solution.

Peripheral visions: The ‘foreign’ football factory
When sport is addressed historically, it is often done with reference to British colonialism. This global process frequently used sporting institutions as instruments for the establishment and strengthening of British hegemony (CitationMason 1986; CitationPerkin 1989). However, Guttmann warns us that acts of resistance to colonialism are significant in seeking to analyse the diffusion of sports: the processes whereby so\called British values were transmitted and contested were as varied as the legacies (1993: 125). According to Marcovits and Hellerman, soccer's “cultural weakness” in the United States exists because of specific events which took place between 1860 and 1930: a period they identify as a crucial phase in the development of sport in the United States (2001). Marcovits had earlier highlighted a distinct sense of ‘American Exceptionalism,’ arguing that “America created a new identity which prided itself on being explicitly different from that anywhere in aristocratic Europe” (1990: 234). This sentiment was considered part of a ‘special relationship’ between Britain and the United States based both on mutual hostility and mutual respect; with Britain still a preeminent―yet waning―colonial power, World War II would consummate a drastic swing in the direction of the United States in terms of the global balance of power. The hostile element of this special relationship demanded that British games be adapted to become more ‘American.’

The game of baseball and its attendant culture epitomised this ‘exceptional’ American sport culture wherein ‘invented tradition’ has become a central feature (CitationMason 1986: 79). An adaptation of the English game of rounders, the sport functioned as an alternative to the upper- and middle-class British pastime of cricket. Simple to play, inexpensive, and requiring minimal equipment, baseball could be adapted to most environments. As a consequence, it became an appropriate game for physical and moral development of the working classes in America (CitationSugden 1994), with impromptu games being staged within urban-industrial recreational spaces. One should note that these features hold true for the baseline requirements of soccer. Indeed, urban space was likewise the foundation for the global development of soccer. However, the invention and spread of American football (henceforth referred to as Gridiron) ensured soccer was effectively ‘crowded out’ from the American sporting landscape, irrespective of seasonal weather variations.

While Gridiron established itself as a game for middle- and upper-class Americans, soccer became a pastime associated with ‘immigrants’ and ‘outsiders’ (CitationFoer 2005; CitationLanfranchi and Taylor 2001). Abrams argues that a ‘dual-process’ explains soccer's marginalisation: “On the one hand, the elites sought to establish their social exclusiveness within the American body politic. And on the other, there was the search to define and bind together a heterogeneous and diverse mass population” (1995: 3). As a consequence, soccer was to be subject to a growing sense of sporting nationalism within the American populace. Though the identities attached to the participation in, and/or the consumption of, baseball or Gridiron were bound up with the exclusive boundaries of a hardening United States class hierarchy, the most trenchant expressions of exceptionalism and exclusion were directed at those posited outside this hierarchy altogether: America's migrant population and the symbolism of the British game that was its preserve. Here, as with the subsequent development of the game and the attendant identities of its participants and consumers, issues of power were central in terms of defining and legitimating certain expressions of citizenship.

Between 1900 and 1930 soccer in the United States was a game played by ‘immigrants’ and ‘outsiders’ (CitationFoer 2005; CitationLanfranchi and Taylor 2001; CitationMarcovits and Hellerman 2003a). And, consonant with the nation's policy of assimilation (which legislated for the ideal of a static national culture into which ethnic cultures are dissolved), these immigrants were expected to become ‘Americanised’ by accepting pluralistic principles and the other values promoted by so-called ‘native’ culture (CitationMarcovits and Hellerman 2001). However, with regard to soccer, Andrews, Pitter, Zwick, and Ambrose state that, “once confronted with the homogenizing impulses of new-world culture, many (but certainly not all) American immigrants enthusiastically appropriated soccer as an expression of national cultural Otherness” (1997: 262). This cemented soccer's perception as a ‘foreign’ sport and entrenched its marginal position within the culture of United States sport (CitationDyreson and Mangan 2007). As Marcovits and Hellerman argue, “if one liked soccer, one was viewed as at least resisting C if not outright rejecting C integration into America” (2001: 52).

By the late nineteenth century a number of amateur clubs were spawned on the East Coast, the most successful being the Kearney Scots Americans (CitationKirsch, Harris and Nolte 2000). The increasing number of amateur clubs brought about the formation of the American Soccer League (ASL): the first attempt to create a soccer competition comprising the country's best teams. All ASL teams were located along the Eastern Seaboard and featured clubs such as Philadelphia Field Club, New York Football Club, and the Jersey City Celtics (CitationNewsham 2006). Players were drawn from particular ethno-national sections of society, a point underlined by Lanfranchi and Taylor: “65The ASL was effectively a multi-ethnic and multinational league, drawing on American-born European personnel but also importing significant numbers of Austrian, Hungarian, Swedish, Irish, English but, above all, Scottish footballers” (2001: 145). Given the socioeconomic complexion of America at the time, the recruitment and over-representation of these players was inseparable from the issue of social class; players and spectators embraced a position outside the American body politic, espousing the values of amateurism and the day-to-day imperatives of resident aliens (CitationHammar 1990). The increasing popularity of the ASL would challenge the definitions of legitimate citizenship identified with baseball and Gridiron, which relied on soccer for their antitheses. This challenge saw the hegemonic place of American sports safeguarded through the implementation of stricter immigration policies (CitationLanfranchi and Taylor 2001; CitationHofstetter 1984).

The ASL consisted of teams and clubs affiliated to factories. These included Boston Wonder Workers (Massachusetts), Providence Gold Bugs (Rhode Island), and Jewish side Brooklyn Hakoah (New York). The most dominant force in the ASL was the predominantly British outfit, Fall River Marksmen (Fall River was one of the leading textile manufacturing areas in the United States). Named after factory owner Sam Mark, the Marksmen won the ASL title in 1923/24, 1924/25, 1925/26, and 1928/29. The majority of teams attracted crowds of between 4,000 and 5,000. By contrast, Fall River regularly pulled over 12,000, illustrating the extent to which British migrants contributed to the ASL's development. Supported by wealthy companies, clubs such as the above-mentioned began to assume an active role in the migration of soccer talent and were prepared to ‘raid’ British teams directly and pay foreign soccer players over twice what they were earning in their home countries (CitationLanfranchi and Taylor 2001).

Angered at the uncertainty surrounding the precise ethno-national origins of certain players, such as Billy Gonsalves,Footnote 1 the American public viewed the United States team as a concoction of ‘foreign’ mercenaries (as opposed to citizens) who were using sport for monetary reward. The perception of foreign players was of “temporary migrants, or sojourners, who never intended to make a new home across the Atlantic” (ibid.: 150),Footnote 2 which further condemned the game to the American sporting periphery.

The ASL ceased to exist in 1929 due to financial difficulties compounded by the devastating effects of the Wall Street Crash and the subsequent nationwide economic depression (Kirsch et al. 2000). The factories to which ASL clubs were affiliated could no longer offer jobs to players and, therefore, the foundations upon which the league was based collapsed (CitationWaldstein and Wagg 1995). There were a number of attempts to re-establish a professional league in the United States; however, because the former ASL depended on, and was dominated by, immigrant players, soccer's perception as a foreign game rendered further attempts unsuccessful (CitationWangerin 2006). The migrant players returned to their former leagues, some to their former clubs. As Waldstein and Wagg argue:

Soccer in the United States fell victim to the growing political sentiment of isolationism. Soccer was regarded as a foreign game … and philosophically it was considered as un-American. These sentiments led to restrictions on immigration which prevented overseas players and coaches from contributing to football in the United States, and eventually removed the US from a cultural interaction with the rest of the world that almost all others engaged in (1995: 78).

It would be more than 30 years before this isolationism was effectively challenged, as United States society was again deemed ripe for the consumption of professional, domestic soccer. Here, certain values of the game were embraced by a section of the population who represented the modern face of American national identity―an identity that was being subtly reshaped in terms of its expression through soccer.

Falling stars: The North American Soccer League
The American public's favourable reaction to 1966 World Cup Final between England and West Germany, televised across the United States by NBC-TV (CitationJose 1989), persuaded American sports entrepreneurs that soccer as a professional sport had economic potential (CitationNewsham 2006). In 1965, two soccer organisations―the United Soccer Association (USA), supported by sports enthusiasts Jack Kent Cooke and Lamar Hunt, and the National Professional Soccer League (NPSL), backed by United States sport fanatics Bill Cox and Robert Hermann―sought to launch a FIFA-sanctioned, nationwide professional soccer league (CitationJose 1989). FIFA entrusted Irishman Joe Barriskill, head of the United States Soccer Football Association (USSFA), to choose between the competing bids. The NPSL refused demands by the USSFA that a percentage of gate receipts and television money be handed to the governing body. As a consequence, Barriskill voted in favour of the USA.

The USA imported entire teams from Europe and South America to play under assumed names. English clubs Wolverhampton Wonderers, Stoke City, and Sunderland all joined in 1967 becoming the Los Angeles Wolves, the Cleveland Stokers, and the Vancouver Royals.Footnote 3 The failure of the USA to establish itself as a respectable professional league forced a merger with the (equally unsuccessful) NPSL in 1967. This merger created the North American Soccer League (NASL).

The NASL faced similar problems to those encountered by the ASL: North American-born players were generally not very good and clubs were therefore overreliant on foreigners. The inaugural season featured 17 teams comprising some 350 players, only 30 of whom were American-born. To break even, the NASL would have to average 20,000 per game, but support remained poor, with average attendances reaching just 3,000C4,000 (CitationNewsham 2006). Consequently, players' contracts were cancelled and club executives abandoned their teams, leaving the NASL to begin its second season with just five of the seventeen clubs with which it commenced; the NASL was about to collapse. In the absence of other willing candidates, Phil Woosnam was appointed NASL Commissioner. A Welshman who coached the Atlanta Chiefs to the NASL title in its inaugural season, Woosnam in turn appointed Clive Toye, former coach of the NASL's Baltimore Bays as the league's Director of Administration and Information. Woosnam and Toye sought to prevent the collapse of the NASL. To this end they were supported financially by Lamar Hunt, oil tycoon and owner of the NASL's Dallas Tornado's. Hunt's success in previous endeavours sparked interest among other wealthy individuals (CitationMarcovits and Hellerman 2001).

At the beginning of the 1970s interest in the NASL began to grow. This development was connected to a revaluing of the identities attached to soccer and Gridiron. First, as Sugden argues, many middle-class parents were unhappy with the violence and expense associated with Gridiron (1994). The market fundamentalism formalised in the 1980s by President Reagan's economic dictates, better known as ‘Reaganomics,’ saw National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Gridiron shot through with capital. College sport was growing into a multimillion dollar business and entertainment industry and NCAA recruiters now turned to poor urban areas where ‘raw’ talent might more likely be found than in the American middle classes, which were Gridiron's traditional bastion. Middle-class parents now regarded the game as unsuitable for the development of physical, social, and moral qualities required for their children's future careers in law, medicine, and business.

As a result, soccer grew in popularity both in high schools and as an intercollegiate sport, which created a new ‘youthful’ audience to which the NASL could appeal. Soccer now had a youth caucus not so obviously dependent on immigrant and ethnic involvement. Furthermore, intercollegiate soccer gave the NASL a more obviously ‘American’ domestic ‘farm’ system to recruit from (CitationWangerin 2006). Attendance figures increased and the ABC television network sporadically covered NASL games. However, despite the growth and increasing youth participation in soccer, media interest remained relatively poor. The paucity of American players was proving detrimental to the growth of a domestic market.

In an attempt to separate soccer from its ‘foreign’ game stigma, a college draft was implemented whereby young American-born players could be selected by NASL team coaches. However, notwithstanding soccer's growth as an intercollegiate sport, only a small number of American-born players selected in the draft actually made a first team appearance. In 1979, only 29 of the 97 signed in the annual draft played a game (CitationLanfranchi and Taylor 2001). That so few made the game perhaps reflects the shortcomings of those in charge of signings:

The league's managers, almost all of them British, were much more comfortable rummaging through the Football League for durable tradesmen looking for summer work than they were traipsing across North America in pursuit of unproven and unfamiliar names, be they young collegiate or capable semi-professionals (CitationWangerin 2006: 155).

The NASL faced a dilemma: it stood a better chance of surviving by recruiting homegrown players from colleges, but Americans were not accustomed to substandard sports (CitationSugden 1994).

The NASL attempted to resolve this dilemma by recruiting a core of ‘American’ players through college programmes while maintaining the quality demanded by existing and prospective audiences through the acquisition of foreign stars (CitationLanfranchi and Taylor 2001). The most notable in 1975 was the then recently ‘retired’ 34-year-old Brazilian soccer legend Pelé (CitationSatterlee 2007). Immediately, interest in the NASL began to increase, with Pelé’s New York Cosmos regularly attracting crowds above 50,000 on a regular basis (CitationNewsham 2006). Pelé legitimised the league in the eyes of the American audience and other world famous foreign players who agreed to play in the NASL. Crowds came to watch these stars, but their presence was a short\term strategy.

As these players began to retire, the quality of play within the league decreased, as did attendances, further reinforcing soccer's perception as ‘un-American.’ An increasing reliance on the recruitment of foreign players, both directly into the league and onto college scholarships themselves, was then evidenced (CitationWangerin 2006).Footnote 4 In response, the NASL implemented regulations intending to encourage the use of ‘home-grown’ talent. Initially, in 1973, teams were only required to include three ‘Americans’ in their squads, a figure rising to five by 1975. By 1976, however, five American players were required in the starting lineups, and by 1979 only 13 foreigners were permitted in each squad (CitationLanfranchi and Taylor 2001). This specification was accompanied by governmental restrictions when, in 1979, following pressure from the newly formed Players Association, the Department of Labor made it increasingly difficult for players to acquire work visas, thereby reducing the league's ‘foreign allowance’ to ten per club.

However, such regulations proved unsuccessful in preventing the league from foreign domination as the loaning of players to and from European clubs provided a loophole that many clubs took advantage of, most notably via ‘summer engagements’ written into player contracts. Thus, by the late 1970s, former British players continued to dominate and were joined by an increasing number of players from Denmark, West Germany, and the former Yugoslavia. Because foreign players were seen to be playing in the NASL for ‘material benefits’ while on ‘holiday’ in America, they were seen as failing to contribute to the development of United States soccer, simply using it as a means to an end (CitationLanfranchi and Taylor 2001).

Then, following a conflict between the West London club Fulham FC and the Los Angeles Aztecs over the loaning of George Best (the Aztecs claimed to own the player), NASL clubs were banned from loaning players from English and Scottish clubs by the latter two football associations (ibid.).Footnote 5 The ban saw the quality of play in the NASL continue to diminish as did attendance figures. The revenue now generated could not recoup the large amounts of money spent on foreign players' contracts. Despite a strong campaign from the United States Soccer Federation (USSF)―the word “football” was dropped from the Federation's title in 1974―to host the 1988 World Cup, the quadrennial competition was awarded to Mexico. This was detrimental to the NASL. Consequently, Warner Communications withdrew their crucial financial support from the NASL (CitationSugden and Tomlinson 1998). Mistakes made by the league administration in an attempt to expand compounded the NASL's rapid demise and its subsequent collapse in 1985 due to large financial losses (CitationNewsham 2006). Significantly, though, the legacy of the NASL continued long after the league ceased to exist.

Soccer's transformation: The rise of the ‘soccer mom’
During the NASL's time as an established professional soccer league, teams such as the Tampa Bay Rowdies, Seattle Sounders, and Chicago Sting implemented youth programmes to increase ‘grass-root’ participation (CitationAndrews 1999). These programmes, combined with the introduction of ‘Title IX’ via the 1972 Education Amendments Act,Footnote 6 contributed to a notable increase in youth participation in soccer. Between 1981 and 1991, the number of soccer participants in United States high schools increased by 84 percent, from approximately 190,000 to 350,000 (40 percent of which were female), with a concomitant increase in the number of private and community-based teams and collegiate soccer programmes (CitationPesky 1993). In conjunction with the grass-root schemes that stemmed from the wake of the NASL's demise, Marcovits and Hellerman suggest that the NASL legitimised soccer in the eyes of the American professional and managerial classes who were seeking a game that (in contrast to Gridiron) was comparatively “non-confrontational, non-violent, ‘multicultural,’ often coeducational, non-competitive, and different from what many of the upscale and educated viewed as the crass and crude milieu of the Big Three” (2003a: 17).

In response to the increased youth participation, in 1964 the American Youth Soccer Organisation (AYSO) was founded. AYSO established leagues with a focus on participation, fun, and minimal competition―a stark contrast to the ‘win at all costs’ philosophy apparent in other sports, including their respective youth elements (CitationWangerin 2006). Soccer leagues handed out ‘participation trophies’ to every player regardless of ability. Some leagues refrained from keeping score and others prohibited heading the ball (as a safety measure). Teams were dissolved at the end of each season to allocate an equal number of talented players to maintain parity throughout the league (CitationFoer 2005). As a result, soccer became, and still remains, the second favourite participatory team sport in the United States, surpassing Baseball and just trailing Basketball. It remains, however, a minor spectator sport.

For all its rhetoric of mass participation and inclusion, soccer's recently formed identity as a young, white, middle-class, and often female affair essentially excluded it from the mainstream of American sports culture. Soccer, “the sporting practise and symbol of fin-de-millennium suburban America” (CitationAndrews et al. 1997: 262), is part of the innately competitive, socially differentiating, and highly stylized lifestyles that define membership of the suburban elite (CitationFoer 2005). Partly through soccer, this suburban, middle-class echelon of American society separated itself from the non-white, urban poor by ensuring the game's economic exclusivity (CitationAndrews 1999; CitationHaase 2003).Footnote 7 A reservoir of underprivileged working class sporting ambition thus remained virtually closed to United States soccer.

The literature surrounding suburban soccer culture often refers to this divide in terms of participation within specific sociospatial settings (i.e., urban and suburban) are essentially euphemisms for class and ‘race’ divides. Of the Americans that play soccer at least once a year, 83 percent are ‘White’ and 12.5 percent ‘Black’ (CitationAndrews et al. 1997). As Sugden states, ethnic dominated leagues exist in and around cities such as St Louis, Philadelphia, New York, and Fall River; however, there is little relationship between these leagues and the high school and collegiate leagues that involve a predominantly white middle-class demographic (1994). The involvement of many British players and coaches in United States soccer is, Sugden argues, evidence that Americans no longer perceive British or Anglo influence as a threat. Instead, middle-class Americans, having reforged the identity of the game in their own image, are welcoming ‘Anglo’ involvement in an attempt to prevent “an increasing Afro-American, Latin and Asian cultural invasion” (ibid.: 248).

As we have seen, America's place in the global economy has brought new ethno-national populations to its shores and across its borders, while its domestic policies have deepened the patterns of deprivation that lock existing minority populations in areas of urban relegation (CitationWacquant 2008). Today's custodians of United States soccer have sought succour from the old enemy in entrenching societal divisions that ensure the sport remains the preserve of the (predominantly) white middle classes. However, they have also identified a new adversary: traditional America.

By adopting soccer as ‘their’ game, middle-class parents have self-consciously created a counterculture that separates them from the values of ‘traditional America’: “When they adopted soccer, it gave the impression that they had turned their backs on the American pastime. This, naturally, produced even more disdain for them C and for their sport” (CitationFoer 2005: 232). A disdain exemplified in accusations that soccer is the ‘world's game’ and a ‘socialist’ sport, a threat to ‘exceptional’ America because it is considered ‘un-American.’Footnote 8 Of course, the sport's proponents may not identify with these descriptors; indeed, they may see participation in soccer as wholly consonant with the values of ‘modern’ America. The very fabric of national identity is contested here, with the place of masculinity and femininity among the issues being negotiated.

As America does not burden soccer with the esteem of ‘national game’ status, it carries no tradition of male domination and, therefore, has remained particularly accessible to females. Gender is particularly pertinent as “nowhere else is women's soccer the cultural equivalent of C or even superior to C the men's game, as it is in the United States” (CitationMarcovits and Hellerman 2003b: 14). Over seven million United States females played soccer by 1998, rendering the game the most popular female sport in America (CitationKnoppers and Anthonissen 2003), while the recently formed Women's Professional Soccer (WPS) league is the richest in the world and attracts the world's most talented female players. The success of the women's United States national side on the world stage, winning World Cups in 1991 and 1999 (and enjoying relatively large media coverage), only served to further marginalise soccer from an American male audience. Indeed, the success of the United States women's team added to the backlash, and ‘traditional America’ condemned soccer to the periphery of the American sporting landscape as a consequence of its supposed lack of masculinity (CitationHase 2002).Footnote 9

Major league soccer and the pursuit of the Latin quarter
In 1988 FIFA awarded the 1994 World Cup Finals to the USA, a decision taken with the realisation of the economic potential of staging the competition in “the biggest media and consumer market in the world” (CitationSugden and Tomlinson 1998: 211). The awarding of the World Cup was based on a contingency set by FIFA that a professional soccer league be established (CitationJozsa 2004; CitationMoniz 2007). The tournament achieved a record attendance of 3,567,415 over 52 games, exceeding the average attendance at the 1990 World Cup in Italy by more than a million (CitationLongman 1994: 1) and leading the USSF president Alan Rothberg to declare somewhat bombastically that the tournament was the greatest World Cup ever.

The legacy of ‘USA 94’ brought about the formation in 1996 of Major League Soccer (MLS). Realising MLS would carry the burden of previous failed soccer leagues, Rothenberg, along with MLS commissioner Doug Logan, implemented a number of novel strategies. Prior to the commencement of the league, Rothenberg announced an investment target of $75 million to be met before the league would begin its operations―a target met by the combination of soccer-friendly oilman Lamar Hunt and multibillionaire Christian philanthropist Philip Anshutz, who regarded soccer as family-friendly and, therefore, a viable and ethical business investment (CitationBowley 2007).

National television exposure was regarded as paramount if MLS was to compete with the ‘Big Three.’ This was now much more attainable due to an increasingly fragmented broadcasting market brought on by the growth in cable and satellite channels (CitationWangerin 2006). However, a major marketing problem remained in that televised sporting events in the United States have traditionally been based on the corporate-driven rhythms of the ‘Big Three,’ in which frequent stoppages in play allow for commercials to be regularly aired (CitationMoniz 2007).Footnote 10 Because of the poor record of previous soccer leagues in the United States, a television contract was not forthcoming. Consequently, Anschutz paid ABC, ESPN, and Univision (a Spanish language broadcaster) for the airtime through the sports entertainment subsidiary of the Anschutz corporation: Anschutz Entertainment Group (AEG) (CitationWangerin 2006). However, national television coverage alone would not ensure the league's survival; a number of strategies needed to be implemented.

United States collegiate soccer has largely failed to produce high-quality United States-born players. This is not surprising given that United States college teams only play three and a half months a year. To address this, MLS introduced Project-40, a joint initiative between MLS and USSF, which aimed to identify the most promising seventeen to twenty-two year olds, offering them a year-round developmental contract essentially allowing them to play soccer in a professional environment while they pursued further and higher education.Footnote 11 Project-40 has produced players such as Josh Wolf and DeMarcus Beasley, who have gone on to establish themselves as mainstays in the United States national team.

To appear more major, United States soccer sought to nurture ‘indigenous’ talent. From its inception, MLS implemented restrictions on foreign players. Each team was permitted to include a maximum of four foreigners per game. Such a restriction was imposed to encourage the use of homegrown talent to both develop high-quality United States national players and separate soccer from its foreign associations. Like the NASL, MLS was mainly composed of United States-born players assisted by ageing foreign stars and marginal foreign-born players, most prominently from South America. Despite being past their prime, such players were the ‘standout’ players of MLS (CitationMoniz 2007). This fact had negative implications for the league.

MLS then purposefully sought high-quality foreign players, allocating them to specific teams to appeal to a specific geographical ethnic market to “reflect the changing ethnic complexion of United States society” (CitationLanfranchi and Taylor 2001: 165). There was more to this than soccer abilities; MLS decided against courting other minority populations in a similar manner.

The United States Hispanic community is the largest and fastest growing minority ethnic population in the United States population―expected to be 55 million by 2020 (CitationJewell and Molina 2005). The Latino demographic was believed to have an annual spending power of $170bn (CitationDelgado 1999). With good marketing, this demographic could ensure sufficient ticket sales to sustain football clubs and attract large television network contracts central to the success of United States professional sports (CitationWangerin 2006). Accordingly, Rothenberg made the targeting of the Hispanic population a major program of his USSF presidency.

Such thinking may also have influenced the appointment of the bilingual Doug Logan as MLS commissioner. MLS focussed much of their ‘foreign player allowance’ on Hispanic players, thereby moving away from the British and European influence that predominated in the ASL and NASL (Kirsch et al. 2000: 437). The most notable example of this was Mexican national goalkeeper Jorge Campos who was assigned by MLS to the Los Angeles Galaxy to appeal to a large Hispanic fan base living in California. However, for MLS to be successful economically, Delgado suggests, “Latinos must not be Othered; instead, they must be fully integrated into the American economy as consumers of mass culture and the attendant vast array of goods and services” (1999: 46). Indeed, MLS's pursuing of the Latin quarter underlines the ways in which America's minority populations are expected to engage with mainstream society through acts of socially sanctioned consumption; the grammar of citizenship thus becomes inseparable from the shaping of a consumer lifestyle.

Unsurprisingly, considering the above, all MLS teams currently have Latinos on their roster. Such players feature most prominently close to the Mexican border in clubs such as the San Jose Earthquakes, Los Angeles Galaxy, FC Dallas, and Tampa Bay Mutiny. Teams situated in predominantly ‘Anglo’ cities, such as the Kansas City Wizards and Chicago Fire, carry more European and African players (CitationDelgado 1997). The targeting of such specific ethnic groups for football's economic gain has brought controversy when the same people are otherwise considered an economic drain. Delgado (ibid.) suggests that the wider national political rhetoric has alienated United States-based Latinos regardless of nationality. Notable in this is the ‘California Proposition 187,’ a ballot initiative proposed in 1994 to deny illegal immigrants social services, health care, and public education (CitationHernandez 1999). By way of contrast, Moniz views MLS's marketing strategy positively, stating that soccer provided American-born Hispanic generations with a mechanism through which they could claim and identify somewhere between their birthplace and that of their parents: “They participate in the construction and conceptualization of the transnational community” (2007: 461).

Given the diversity of Latinos as an ethnic group and their divided soccer (and hence brand) loyalties, the Latino's role in United States soccer is complex (CitationWilson 2007). Matches in Mexico and other Latin American countries hold more significance for millions of Latinos than do MLS games (ibid.). To ground this statistically, Univision (the largest Spanish language broadcaster) claims that more Latino men aged between nineteen and forty-nine watched the Mexican league's championship in June 2004 than the 2004 Super Bowl or the final game of the World Series.

The appeal of the indigenous was also pursued in MLS's strategy. In conjunction with the acquisition of Hispanic players, predominantly drawn from Haiti, El Salvador, and Mexico, Sunil Gulati (MLS Deputy Commissioner) managed to attract a number of high-profile ex-pat United States national players to return to professional, American soccer. The most notable were Alexei Lalas from Italian side Padova, Cobi Jones from Coventry City, and Tony Meola formerly with Watford FC. With ten teams in place, a core of American players, and some cleverly distributed Hispanic acquisitions, the inaugural season of MLS kicked off in San Jose in front of a sellout crowd of over 31,000 at the Spartan Stadium. The inaugural season exceeded expectations in terms of attendance average, surpassing at 17,000 MLS's original target of 11,000 (CitationJones 1998). However, MLS still featured infrequently on SportsCenter, ESPN's daily sports news television show, and on the rare occasion when MLS was aired, Wangerin recounts, it was delivered with degrees of sarcasm by reporters and journalists (2006).

In search of an audience: The final frontier?
After such a positive start, attendance figures dropped and, by the third season, had fallen by 16 percent (CitationMarcovits and Hellerman 2001). Television ratings were poor, and even Univision's Hispanic audience slipped as MLS games were aired on Sunday afternoons, creating direct competition with Mexican league games (CitationJewell and Molina 2005). Furthermore, a poor showing by the United States national side at the France ‘98 World Cup―the team lost all of its three matches in the group stages, scoring only one goal―failed to produce any recognisable celebrity players (CitationWangerin 2006). ESPN, however, continued to broadcast MLS games, with Wangerin suggesting this was as a result of the consumer demographic, as the audience were “young, malleable consumers whose ‘brand loyalties’ were not yet ‘entrenched’” (ibid.: 291). However, Cable Television was seemingly working against MLS as the English Premier League (EPL) and the European Champions League were now being broadcast into American homes, helping the United States-based ‘core’ fan recognise MLS as a second rate sport (ibid.). As a consequence, attendance figures fell for the fourth straight year, despite the success of the women's national side in winning the 1999 Women's World Cup. By 1999, MLS had lost $250 million in operating costs, and only a few teams were averaging crowds of 10,000 per game (CitationJosza 2004).

To address this, the NFL veteran of 15 years, Don Garber, was appointed as MLS Commissioner in place of Doug Logan (CitationBell 2007). In an attempt to align the game with the rest of the world, Garber's first action was to abolish the ‘shoot-out,’Footnote 12 replacing it with two five-minute golden goal periods. This meant that, for the first time in a quarter of a century, an American professional soccer match could end in a draw―even a goalless one (CitationMoniz 2007). However, attendances continued to decline in 2000, apart from in Columbus, Ohio, where the average attendance increased by 5,000 (CitationJosza 2004). This was as a result of the building of the first soccer-specific stadium in MLS, capable of holding 22,500 and financed by Lamar Hunt (CitationBell 2002). One of Garber's main aims, subsequently, was for every MLS team to have a soccer-specific stadium.

Following a successful World Cup 2002 in South Korea and Japan, where the United States national team unexpectedly reached the quarter final only to be defeated by Germany, interest in United States soccer began to increase. No fewer than eleven of the twenty-three players of the American national team played in MLS, eight of whom were on the field of play when the United States defeated Mexico 2-0. This success saw the national team rise to fourth in FIFA's world rankings in April 2006, ahead of the perennial giants of Spain, France, Argentina, Portugal, and England (CitationFIFA 2006). As a result, the 2002 MLS Cup, held four months after the World Cup final, set the championship attendance record with a sellout crowd of over 61,000 at the Gillette Stadium that saw the Los Angeles Galaxy win their first title. MLS also signed a four-year television contract with Fox Sports International (FSI) to broadcast regular season games and eight play-off games. FSI's broadcasts were also extended to its affiliated networks in Latin America as well as producing a highlight show: ‘MLS Wrap.’Footnote 13

Soccer remains a long way from challenging the ‘Big Three’ of United States spectator sport, evidenced by attendance figures, gate receipts, television audience ratings, and advertising revenues. Total attendances in MLS in 2004 were three million, a figure dwarfed by Major League Baseball (MLB) with 74 million, the National Football League (NFL) with 69 million, and the National Basketball Association (NBA) with 74 million. In fact, MLS attendance ranked lower than golf and auto racing. Unsurprisingly, this creates a corresponding gap in gate revenues; MLS and all other forms of United States soccer generated $60 million, whereas NFL, MLB, and the NBA all generated over $1bn.

In the never-ending pursuit of audiences and incomes, MLS introduced the Designated Player Rule―subsequently dubbed ‘the Beckham Rule’―in 2006. This allowed each MLS team to sign one (subsequently increased to two) players who would be allowed to earn monies outside of the salary cap.Footnote 14 This enabled MLS teams to compete for high-quality international stars in an attempt to increase spectatorship (CitationDavis 2007). At the same time, the number of foreigners permitted to play in each team increased steadily from four in MLS's inaugural season to eight in the 2008 season.

The Designated Player rule has enabled MLS to attract a number of established international players. These have included Chilean Juan Pablo Angel (formerly of Aston Villa), Mexican Cuauhtemoc Blanco (formerly of Mexican side Club América), and Argentinean Claudio Reyna (formerly of Bayer Leverkusen and Manchester City). However, the most notable signing has been the LA Galaxy's acquisition of David Beckham―a deal that involved the most lucrative contract in American soccer history (Walsh 2007).Footnote 15 The acquisition of the quintessential sporting superstar is expected to have a monumental impact on United States soccer.

At the time of his move, Beckham was thirty-one yearsold and no longer one of the best players in the world. That said, he was a coveted top-level player, having rejected offers from Italian giants AC Milan and Internazionale and EPL club Newcastle United prior to joining the Galaxy. Beckham also earned his 100th cap for England as an LA Galaxy player. Notwithstanding this, Beckham's iconic status generated something more powerful than any other player in the world: a global brand (CitationSmart 2005; CitationRojek 2001; CitationLim 2005). In the eyes of the global media, Beckham is both the ‘brand’ and the ‘athlete’ (CitationMilligan 2004; CitationJackson 2001; CitationPringle 2004). MLS hoped Beckham would make every game he played an ‘event,’ providing a level of credibility to MLS that may well attract the curiosity of the average American sports fan who previously approached soccer with degrees of indifference (CitationCava 2007). When open play was halted for a set-piece, Beckham's ability to execute precise and dramatic free-kicks was supposedly amenable to “American attention spans and highlight packages” (CitationWahl 2007: 42).

Beckham's universal brand is recognised by many who have little interest in his athletic abilities or indeed soccer. Furthermore, his ‘metro-sexuality’ transcends barriers of gender and sexuality. He is a genuine fashion icon, having appeared in United States magazines Arena, Homme Plus, The Face, and on the front cover of women's magazine Marie-Claire (the first male to do so in its fourteen-year history), as well as gay magazine Attitude. The gay icon status may also have implications for the perception of soccer in the United States as a female―or, in many instances, as a feminine―sport (CitationCashmore 2002). MLS also noted Beckham's potential appeal to inner-city, African American consumers―a market MLS and United States soccer have failed to penetrate. Beckham enjoys high-profile associations with African American celebrities, such as rap artist ‘Snoop Dog,’ and borrows performative cues from African and African American culture, having previously sported cornrows, Nigerian sarongs, and declared his love for all things hip-hop (CitationMackenzie 2003).

Beckham was brought in to be everything to everyone. In a country where the game has been variously used to retrace class divisions and treated as a subject of xenophobia, Beckham is the foreign player burdened with cultivating a mass audience for the game without alienating the white middle classes who currently compose its core in terms of mass participation. Ideally, Beckham would also facilitate the increased movement of United States capital around the globe.

American sport franchise owners now see expansion into English football not just as a way of making money but also as a way of expanding recognition of their existing ‘brands’ (CitationL'Hote, Fletcher and Eves 2006). British-owned sports broadcaster, Setanta, is a reported target of Walt Disney (the second largest media conglomerate in the world) in its mission to expand its American ESPN network internationally. This is by no means a one-way process. A New Jersey-based promotions company, Champions World, organised an exhibition tour of prominent European teams including Manchester United, Celtic FC, Barcelona, Juventus, and AC Milan as early as 2003 (CitationBrown 2005). The United States tours by Manchester United, Liverpool FC, and Chelsea FC in 2007 and West Ham and Everton in 2008 are as much about increasing the awareness of their respective ‘brands’ in the United States as they are about generating an immediate economic profit. Furthermore, in 2006, Arsenal FC entered into an exclusive agreement with Kroenke Sports Enterprises (owned by American billionaire Stanley Kroenke) with the aim of improving awareness of the Arsenal ‘brand’ in the United States (CitationLindsay 2007). This deal is particularly interesting because Arsenal FC is one of the top EPL clubs not (yet) American-owned.

As Grant Wahl has argued, Beckham has achieved most of the objectives of MLS: raised the global profile of the United States game, sold 350,000 LA Galaxy replica shirts, raised average attendance figures by 10,000 when playing away from home, and increased sponsorship revenues and season-ticket sales at his home club (2009). Furthermore (and perhaps outside Beckham's immediate sphere of influence), MLS currently has fewer imported players than the majority of European leagues, and there are now more Americans playing in the English Premier League than Britons in MLS.

However, Beckham's exploits have met with some controversy and resistance. In July 2009, he faced abuse from the vociferous ‘Riot Squad’ section of LA Galaxy fans who accused him of ‘betraying’ them and their team by seeking a loan move to Italian giants AC Milan. A realisation on Beckham's part that California might make him rich, but was not a move likely to prolong his international career, meant the insertion of a get-out clause into his five-year deal that allowed Beckham to leave MLS after his third season. Beckham agreed to the removal of this clause to smooth the way for his (first) loan move to AC Milan in 2009. Currently enjoying his second loan spell at the Italian club, Beckham will see out his contract with the LA Galaxy in 2011. Many people suspect he will remain in the USA following the expiration of his contract, possibly as co-owner of a soccer franchise. After being touted as the saviour of United States soccer, he may well become one of its custodians. In the current global climate, soccer is no longer European, nor is it un-American.

As analysis has shown, the possibilities for identity formation attached to soccer in the United States have been shaped by historical processes bound up with American exceptionalism, the hardening of social divisions along lines of ethnicity and class, contesting notions of masculinity and femininity, and the imperatives of consumer-based citizenship. In the context of historical ontology, we hope the foregoing account has shed light on the pressures brought to bear in the debate over what it is to ‘be’ American, and, more specifically, how soccer, in the context of United States society, has helped to define (il)legitimate notions of citizenship and national identity. The story presented here is thus shot through with issues of power. We have seen how the boundaries of the United States body politic have been drawn and stratified through the identities attached to soccer. Early in the development of United States soccer, the prevailing geopolitical climate saw Americans unwilling to be cast as passive recipients of a sport considered a British cultural complex. The issue of immigration then became influential, as soccer became subject to expressions of alterity and concomitant fears that the game provided relay points through which a dangerous immigrant population would make their presence felt in American society. Subsequent shifts in migration and class patterns, bound up with the move from industrial to post-industrial capitalism, saw migrant populations gain an economic foothold and thereby be accepted as citizen-consumers, while notions of masculinity and femininity have also been contested in the context of soccer and its attendant values. Following Hacking's approach to historical ontology, these events and processes have been propelled by an interplay of time, place, power, and resistance, which eventuated in a perceived need for Beckham and shaped his reception in the United States in terms of the identities available to the participants in, and consumers of, United States soccer. Only time will tell whether soccer―with ‘brand Beckham’ in the vanguard―will breach its final frontier.

The authors are grateful for the helpful advice offered by the three anonymous reviewers. Our thanks are also due to the editorial advice offered by Tom Wilson. The paper was inspired by Myles Evans’ knowledge of the issues.

Notes
Address correspondence to Gary Armstrong, Heinz Wolff Building HW206, Brunel University, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB8 3PH, UK. E-gary.armstrong@brunel.ac.uk

James Rosbrook-Thompson, School of Sport and Education, Heinz Wolff Building, Brunel University, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB8 3PH, UK. j.rosbrook-thompson@lse.ac.uk

1. Born in Fall River to Portuguese parents, Gonsalves played for the Marksmen winning many league titles. In May 1931, Gonsalves played for the New York Yankees against Glasgow Celtic (one of the best teams in the world in this era), scoring three goals in a 4-3 victory, which demonstrated that ASL (and particularly United States-born) players could play at the highest level.

2. To exemplify, six players of the 1930 United States World Cup squad were born in Britain.

3. In addition, Brazilian side Bangu became Houston Stars, Italian club Cagliari became Chicago Mustangs, and Uruguay's Cerro became New York Skyliners.

4. In the 1971 National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) final, Howard University of Washington, DC, ended St. Louis University's hopes of a third consecutive championship with a team consisting solely of foreign players (CitationWangerin 2006).

5. Lanfranchi and Taylor suggest that, in the eyes of England and Scotland's respective Football Associations, the Americans “could not be trusted” (2001: 159).

6. A piece of legislation drafted to address gender equality issues within sport and education. The article stated that “No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance” (Department of Labour 1972 cited in CitationMcClusky 2005).

7.CitationAndrews (1999) estimates that, in the mid-1990s, participation in competitive youth soccer cost approximately $4,000 per player per year.

8. This is a product of United States efforts during the Cold War to contain expressions of communism as manifested by the Soviet Union and its Eastern Bloc allies. As soccer was embraced on a global scale, some Americans considered it a ‘communist’ sport. Typical of the ‘soccer haters’ was Former Buffalo Bills quarterback Jack Kemp who, being solidly conservative, sought to maintain the tradition of Gridiron which, in his opinion, represented democratic capitalism. By contrast, soccer was a “65European socialist sport” (cited in CitationHansen 2006: 1).

9. As Martinez states: “If women can triumph in the sport, it really must not be tough enough to qualify as a true test of American masculinity” (2008: 239).

10. For example, the 1994 World Cup final phase was almost not televised in the United States because of television broadcasters’ insistence that FIFA change the format of the games so that more ‘time-outs’ could be taken and, thus, more TV commercials aired (CitationMoniz 2007).

11. Project-40 signees earn the minimum annual MLS salary of $24,000 p.a. and are awarded a five-year academic package by the USSF, which covers tuition fees not in excess of $37,000 (CitationVesky 1998).

12. The shootout involved a player running from thirty meters toward goal and having to beat the goalkeeper and score within 15 seconds (CitationWangerin 2006).

13. A one-hour, studio, hosted show including highlights of teams and games, statistics, and coach and player interviews.

14. MLS introduced a salary cap in 1996 to ensure a level of parity and competitiveness. This figure, which stood at $2.3 million in 2009, represents a limit on the amount each MLS club can spend on annual player salaries.

15. Beckham's annual salary at LA is estimated at $10 million a year, a figure lower than many United States sport stars (CitationSweeney 2007). The greater part of the reported $250 million deal for Beckham is being earned though sponsorship deals, merchandising sales, and club profits. Beckham will earn 40 to 50 percent of Galaxy shirt sales and an undisclosed share of ticket revenue (CitationWahl 2007).