Movement Analysis of Australian National League Soccer Players Using Global Positioning System Technology

Abstract
Wehbe, GM, Hartwig, TB, and Duncan, CS. Movement analysis of Australian National League Soccer players using global positioning system technology. J Strength Cond Res 28(3): 834C842, 2014―Player activity profiles of match play provide valuable information for optimal athlete training prescriptions, competition strategies, and managing load and recovery and are currently lacking in elite Australian-league (A-League) soccer. The aims of the study were, therefore, to (a) determine match activity profiles for elite A-League soccer players and make match-half and positional comparisons and (b) examine the effect of situational factors including evolving match status (drawing, winning, or losing) and goals being scored and conceded on selected match activity profile variables. Global positioning system tracking devices were used to determine activity profiles of 19 elite male adult soccer players during 8 preseason matches (n = 95 files). Total distance, average speed, high-intensity running (HIR) distance, and very high-intensity running distance decreased from the first to the second half by 7.92, 9.47, 10.10, and 10.99%, respectively. Midfielders covered 11.69% more total distance, 28.08% more HIR distance, and had a 10.93% higher average speed than defenders (p ≤ 0.05; d = 1.90, 1.03, and 1.83, respectively). Attackers performed 27.50 and 30.24% less medium accelerations than defenders and midfielders, respectively (p < 0.01; d = 1.54, and 1.73). When the team was winning, average speed was 4.17% lower than when the team was drawing (p ≤ 0.05, d = 0.32). Scoring or conceding goals did not appear to affect HIR. This study adds to limited knowledge of match demands in elite A-League soccer. The match activity profiles provide descriptive benchmarks that could be used to make comparisons with other elite level soccer populations while also providing a framework for game-specific training prescription, competition strategy, and load management. The generalization that defenders experience a relatively lower match load may be questionable given their relatively high acceleration and deceleration demands.

Introduction
Advances in human tracking technologies have markedly increased the ability to perform movement analyses in running-based team sports. With an improved capacity to generate detailed training and match activity profiles, and thus better understand the physical and tactical demands of team sports, there is a growing body of evidence available for facilitating the development of athletes. For example, player activity profiles of match demands are increasingly being used by coaches and trainers to design optimal athlete training prescriptions, competition strategies, and manage load and recovery.

Previous movement analysis research in elite soccer has established that the majority of match time is spent in low-intensity speed ranges (standing, walking, and jogging), with high-intensity (running and sprinting) accounting for about 10% of total time (6,9). Generally, an overall distance of 9C12 km is covered in a match (9), while an average distance of 200 m is covered sprinting (>25.2 km・h611) (13). A majority of individual sprints are performed over distances of 10 m or less (13). In addition, more than 97.5% of the total distance traveled by each player is without the ball (14,16). By profiling the typical demands of elite soccer competition, it becomes possible to determine specific training approaches that replicate match demands while also quantifying the match contribution to athlete weekly training load. The total distance covered in a match, for example, may be used to represent a player's physical load during a match (34). Because total distance gives little information about intensity, high-intensity running (HIR) distance also offers a metric of physical demands in soccer matches (22,23,27). High-intensity activity has been associated with the final outcome of a match (6,13,15,27,35) and thus also provides information for planning training approaches that prepare players for match demands, therefore contributing to improved training specificity.

Until recently, player activity profiles to determine soccer match demands have largely been derived from measures of distances and speeds. However, the use of speed alone to describe high-intensity activity may not be adequate because of the intermittent nature of soccer. A recent study noted that high-intensity activities in soccer occur not only at high speeds but also at low speeds during periods of high accelerations (29). Thus, the inclusion of acceleration measures, which are now more readily available in commercially available tracking technologies, may provide a more comprehensive analysis of player physical demands and warrant additional exploration.

The effect of situational factors such as match status on match activity profiles in soccer may also have important implications for training and competition approaches. Spanish league players covered less distance (p ≤ 0.05) at high intensity (>19.1 km・h611) and more distance (p ≤ 0.05) at low intensity (<14.1 km・h611) when their team was winning compared with when their team was losing (24). English league players performed less high-intensity activity when they were winning (p ≤ 0.05) or losing (p < 0.01) compared with when they were drawing (28). In contrast, another study of players in the English league found that score line had no effect on intensity for forwards and midfielders (3). It has been proposed that the influence of situational factors (such as match status) may be team-specific (36), therefore explaining equivocal findings. Match activity profiles are also likely to be influenced by situational factors such as scoring and conceding goals. Activity profiles during specific time intervals such as the periods before and after goals have not previously been investigated.

To date, the competition demands of soccer played in various countries and at various levels and age groups are well described in the literature but are lacking for elite Australian-league (A-League) soccer (8,17,18). Although similarities in match activity profiles exist between different national leagues and competition levels, studies have shown that other important physical outcomes often differ (total distance, HIR distance, and sprinting distance) (2,11,27). The aims of the study were, therefore, to (a) determine match activity profiles for elite A-League soccer players and make match-half and positional comparisons and (b) examine the effect of situational factors including evolving match status (drawing, winning, or losing) and goals being scored and conceded on selected match activity profile variables.

Methods
Experimental Approach to the Problem
In a prospective, observational design, global positioning system (GPS) tracking devices were used to determine activity profiles of 19 elite soccer players during 8 preseason matches (n = 95 files) leading into the start of the 2011C12 A-League soccer season. The use of GPS is not permitted in the A-League competition. Therefore, to study this population, preseason matches were selected. These matches were sufficiently representative of usual competition demands as they occurred against regular competition season opponents and involved contracted players who were competing for starting positions in the A-League.

Global-positioning-system-derived dependent activity profile variables were examined according to independent variables of match-half (first and second halves), playing position (defender, midfielder, and attacker), and evolving match status (drawing, winning, or losing). Furthermore, HIR distances in the 5-minute time intervals before and after goals were scored and conceded were analyzed. All matches occurred on a standard outdoor grass soccer pitch at approximately the same time of day over 8 consecutive weeks. Players adhered to usual competition preparation procedures, including normal nutritional intake and hydration balance. The effect of player substitutions on match-half and positional comparisons was controlled by only including in these analyses data from players who played full 90-minute matches.

Subjects
Nineteen full-time professional adult male A-League soccer players (mean ± SD: age, 26.0 ± 4.7 years; stature, 180.4 ± 5.5 cm; mass, 77.6 ± 5.0 kg) from a convenience sample were recruited for this study. All study participants were players from the same team in the 2011C12 A-League competition, which represents the highest level of soccer participation within Australia. Goalkeepers were excluded from the study. For positional comparisons, participants were classified into defenders (n = 6; mean ± SD: age, 26.2 ± 4.6 years; stature, 182.6 ± 5.3 cm; mass, 79.9 ± 5.1 kg), midfielders (n = 9; mean ± SD: age, 26.3 ± 5.6 years; stature, 177.7 ± 4.5 cm; mass, 74.5 ± 3.9 kg), and attackers (n = 4; mean ± SD: age, 25.0 ± 4.2 years; stature, 183.2 ± 7.0 cm; mass, 81.2 ± 3.8 kg). Written informed consent was obtained from all players, and the Institution Ethics Committee for Human Investigation approved all experimental procedures.

Procedures
Global Positioning System
Commercially available GPS units (SPI-Pro; GPSports, Canberra, Australia) were used to collect time-motion data. The devices use signals from a minimum of 3 Earth-orbiting satellites to determine position at a frequency of 5 measures per second (5 Hz). Predetermined algorithms were used to calculate position and time derivatives, including distance, speed, and acceleration, based on change in coordinate position. To minimize variability arising from between-unit measurement error, participants were assigned their own GPS unit, which they wore on all data collection occasions (20). Fifteen minutes before match kickoff, GPS units were switched on and kept stationary under open sky to acquire satellite signals. Units were then placed between player's shoulder blades in custom-made padded vests. The validity and reliability of the SPI-Pro 5 Hz units have been reported previously (26,30). Reliability tests showed variations of <3% over distances from 5 to 8,000 m and <5.5% for speeds from 6 to >20.1 km・h611 (26). Coefficient of variation with 90% confidence limits was <4% for distances covered during speeds from <7.2 to 18 km・h611 and ranged between 2 and 13% for distances covered during speeds of >18 km・h611 (30).

Movement Analyses
Player match activity profiles were determined using percent match time spent in the following speed categories: standing (0 to ≤0.6 km・h611), walking (>0.6 to ≤7.1 km・h611), jogging (>7.1 to ≤14.3 km・h611), running (>14.3 to ≤19.7 km・h611), high-speed running (>19.7 to ≤25.1 km・h611), and sprinting (>25.1 km・h611). High-intensity running consisted of running, high-speed running, and sprinting (>14.3 km・h611), and very high-intensity running (VHIR) consisted of high-speed running and sprinting (>19.7 km・h611). These categories have been defined previously for elite level soccer (5,6,13,15,31,32). Distances covered during HIR and VHIR were reported as HIR distance and VHIR distance, respectively. Sprint frequency was determined using the number of entries into the sprinting category lasting at least 1 second where the speed category in the previous 1 second was less than sprinting (≤25.1 km・h611).

Accelerations were classified into 4 categories: medium accelerations (2.5C4.0 m・s612), medium decelerations (612.5 to 614.0 m・s612), high accelerations (>4.0 m・s612), and high decelerations (<614.0 m・s612). Two of these categories (medium and high accelerations) have been defined previously for elite level soccer (5) and similar categories have been defined elsewhere (29). Accelerations were recorded as the frequency of entries into each of the 4 categories lasting at least half a second.

Match-Half and Positional Comparisons
Percent time in speed categories, total distances, average speeds, distances covered during HIR and VHIR, and sprint and acceleration frequencies were divided into 45-minute time intervals for first and second half comparisons. These activity profile variables were also examined according to player position (defenders, midfielders, and attackers) using 90-minute time intervals.

Match Status
To determine if score line influenced player intensity, average speed was examined with reference to the evolving match status (not the final match result). This was calculated as the average speed observed during the aggregates of time spent drawing, winning, and losing. During the 8 preseason matches (total match time 739.19 minutes), total times of 453.60, 189.86, and 95.73 minutes were spent drawing, winning, and losing, respectively.

Pre- and Post-Goal Analysis
To determine the relationship between scoring and conceding goals and player intensity, HIR distances in the 5-minute time intervals preceding and following a goal being scored and preceding and following a goal being conceded were compared. The 5-minute interval after a goal being scored commenced from the time of restart in play (kickoff). Goals that were scored or conceded within the first 5 minutes or within the last 5 minutes of either the first or second half of a match were excluded from the analysis. Only data from players who were on the field during the whole 5 minutes of any particular pre- or post-goal time interval were included. Average and peak 5-minute time interval HIR distances were also calculated and compared (6).

Statistical Analyses
Statistical analysis was done using the PASW Statistics 18 software package (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). To avoid statistical bias from unequal repeated measures on different players, match data were treated as independent samples instead of repeated measures for individuals. This is justified given that situational factors and their effect on player activity profiles vary between different matches (16). Dependent activity profile variables were assessed for normal distribution using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov and Shapiro-Wilk tests with most variables displaying normal distribution. Paired sample t-tests were used to compare first- and second-half activity profiles. Three separate 1-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) tests were used to compare (a) dependent activity profile variables according to playing position with 3 levels (defenders, midfielders, and attackers), (b) average speed according to match status with 3 levels (drawing, winning, or losing), and (c) HIR distances in 5-minute time intervals with 4 levels (pre- and post-goal scored, and pre- and post-goal conceded). Significant differences in ANOVA were identified using Tukey's post hoc tests. Statistical significance was set at p ≤ 0.05. In addition to null hypothesis testing, effect sizes were also reported using Cohen's d for comparisons made with t-tests and Cohen's f for comparisons made with ANOVA (10). Values for d of 0.2, 0.5, and 0.8 and values for f of 0.1, 0.25, and 0.4 represented small, moderate, and large differences, respectively. All results are presented as means ± SD unless otherwise stated.

Discussion
Match activity profiles for various elite soccer teams have previously been reported. Few studies have provided detailed analyses of A-League players including the relationship between situational factors and match activity profiles. The present study found an overall decrease in work rate between the first and second halves of matches. Activity profiles were also related to playing position with defenders recording comparatively less total distance at a lower average speed. These findings are consistent with studies of other national league competitions, with the exception of the finding that defenders did not differ from midfielders, and performed more than attackers in acceleration measures. This study is one of few to examine the influence of situational factors on soccer match activity profiles. Match status does appear to have an effect on the intensity of play, while the examination of 5-minute intervals before and after goals being scored or conceded did not find differences in HIR distances compared with match average 5-minute HIR intervals.

Total distance covered by A-League players in the second half was less than the total distance covered in the first half. This is consistent with previous literature (2,5,6,8,27). In the present study, percent time spent running and high-speed running and distance covered during HIR and VHIR significantly decreased in the second half. Similarly, studies on English, Italian, and Danish league players also found that HIR decreased in the second half (15,27). In contrast, studies done in the Brazilian league, English Premier League (EPL), Australian league, European Champions League, and Spanish league have reported no differences in high-intensity activity between first and second halves (2,5,6,8,14). Although it is generally assumed that high-intensity activity is reduced in the second half, this may not always be the case. It may be that certain situational factors, such as the importance of the match, the match score, first-half events, substitutions, tactical changes, formation adjustments, and coaching instructions at half time, have an influence on activity profiles in the second half making a consistent trend difficult to determine. Different technologies and movement analysis methodologies used in these studies also contribute to the difficulty in making interstudy comparisons.

Accelerations are an important component of physical performance in soccer (29), yet up until now measurement of player acceleration characteristics has not been easily available in movement analyses. The examination of distances and speeds alone can misrepresent the actual physiological demands of soccer. Increased metabolic loads in a soccer match occur not only during high-speed movements but also at low speeds when acceleration is high. For example, in a previous study using speed and acceleration measures to determine metabolic load, it was estimated that mechanical power at 14 km・h611 with zero acceleration was equivalent to mechanical power at 5 km・h611 with an acceleration of 2.5 m・s612, thus requiring approximately the same metabolic power despite a lower speed (29). Identifying acceleration patterns can, therefore, provide an improved understanding of the physiological load in a match, and a more complete match analysis may be achieved when distance and speed measures are quantified in conjunction with acceleration measures. This is an intriguing approach, which may prove to be an improved method for quantifying physiological demands in soccer. Additional studies are, however, required to establish the efficacy of GPS technologies for measuring accelerations in team sports.

Nevertheless, in this study, the frequencies of medium accelerations, medium decelerations, and high decelerations in A-League soccer players were significantly less in the second half, whereas high accelerations were not. A study of elite European players found no difference between first and second halves for both medium (53 ± 6 vs. 53 ± 6) and high (6 ± 2 vs. 7 ± 2) accelerations (5). It is well recognized that the ability to repeat sprints is important for physical performance in soccer (1,7,12,31). The same is likely to be true for the ability to repeat accelerations because accelerating is a key element in performing sprints and other high-intensity activities. Consequently, players in the current study might benefit from an improved capacity to repeat acceleration efforts in the second half of matches. Objective deceleration measures have not previously been reported in movement analysis studies in elite soccer. One study on EPL players used subjective video analysis to quantify deceleration events from approximately 5 minutes of “purposeful movement” for each player (4). The authors reported that players performed an average of 9.3 decelerations per 15 minutes in a match, whereas players in the present study performed an average of 24.8 decelerations per 15 minutes. The contrasting results can in part be attributed to the difference in methodology.

Across various national leagues, literature consistently reports that midfielders cover the most total and HIR distance in a match, whereas defenders (specifically central defenders) cover the least total and HIR distance (2,5,6,8,11,12,14,15,32). In the present study, defenders, which included both central and wide defenders (fullbacks), also recorded significantly less total and HIR distance than midfielders. However, frequencies of medium accelerations, medium decelerations, and high decelerations were not different between defenders and midfielders and were higher among defenders than attackers. Although defenders cover less total and HIR distance than other positions, they may not necessarily experience the least amount of physiological strain in a match. According to the results of this study, defenders performed as many bouts of medium and high accelerations as midfielders and significantly more than attackers. Such a finding has important implications for position-specific player conditioning. Although defenders may not be required to cover as much area on the pitch as midfielders, they may need to be as sharp and explosive as midfielders. Defenders are required to react quickly to threatening situations and close down opposition attackers. In certain situations, defenders must get to the ball first to diffuse goal-scoring opportunities for the opposition team. These tasks often require high acceleration at low speeds, which constitute a high physiological strain.

A-League players in the present study had a significantly lower average speed when winning compared with when drawing, suggesting a decline in intensity when the team was ahead on goals. This is consistent with a previous study on EPL players that reported less high-intensity activity when the team was winning compared with when the team was drawing (28). Although, the study on EPL players also found reduced high-intensity activity when the team was losing compared with when the team was drawing. A study on Spanish League players found that 50% less high-intensity activity was performed when the team was winning compared with when the team was losing (24). Collectively, these findings seem to suggest that when a team is leading on goals, players decrease their purposeful movement because they no longer need to score. A confounder to this interpretation is the possibility that teams who are more successful are perhaps more efficient with ball movement and therefore less reliant on physical activity (33). Furthermore, possession of the ball was retained for longer periods of time when Spanish league and EPL teams were losing compared with when winning or drawing (21,25). Because the onus to score is on the team losing, teams retain possession for longer periods of time and have to work harder to move into advanced positions. One study on EPL players reported that match status had no influence on intensity of play (3), although the methodology employed for analysis used a 2-category classification of motion (“Exercise” and “Rest”) based on visual inspection of 15-minute videos on individual players that may not provide sufficient measurement sensitivity. Although the effects of 1 situational factor such as match status should not be used to make generalizations about soccer performance, because movement outcomes are influenced by many factors and are probably unique for individual teams (36), such information could be used to make decisions about player substitutions and match strategies.

In this study, match average and match peak 5-minute HIR distances were 123 and 237 m, respectively, which were similar to elite European league players who ranged between 129 and 134 m for average and 222 and 243 m for peak (5,6). The present study found that HIR distance covered in the 5-minute interval directly before a goal was conceded was significantly higher than the HIR distance covered in the 5-minute interval immediately after. However, there were no differences in HIR distance between the average 5-minute interval in a match and the 5-minute intervals before and after goals. Therefore, during the matches observed in this study, scoring or conceding goals did not seem to have an effect on the amount of HIR in these 5-minute intervals. It is possible that the selected time intervals were perhaps too long to observe the influence of goal scoring on match activity patterns. Jones et al. (21) found that individual possession spells in EPL matches lasted an average of 18 seconds, with 36.5% of possessions lasting 3 seconds or less. Furthermore, Garganta et al. (19) found that more than 50% of goals scored by 5 elite European teams came from attacking plays lasting 10 seconds or less. Therefore, in the present study, it is likely that possession alternated between the 2 teams numerous times during 5-minute intervals before goals were scored and conceded. Future research should further explore the relationship between activity profiles and key match events such as goal-scoring periods.

Practical Applications
In summary, this study adds to limited knowledge of match demands in elite A-League soccer. The match activity profiles provide descriptive benchmarks that could be used to make comparisons with other elite level soccer populations while also providing a framework for game-specific training prescription, competition strategy, and load management. Novel information on acceleration characteristics in elite level soccer is presented. Player acceleration efforts were lower in the second half and were position specific. Effectively performing acceleration efforts, including repeated efforts, requires a highly targeted training approach. Therefore, it is recommended that coaches and trainers incorporate drills that target this physical capacity and also evaluate players based on acceleration performance. The generalization that defenders have a relatively lower match load may be questionable because previous elite soccer match analyses did not quantify acceleration. Match acceleration demands of defenders are at least as high as midfielders and higher than attackers. This finding should be used to optimize position-specific training approaches, particularly for defenders. Managing load and optimizing recovery is a major challenge for professional team sport athletes and doing so effectively requires objective measures of weekly load. The results of the present study can, therefore, assist coaches in estimating the physical loads that players are likely to be exposed to during matches. By combining these match data with training data, a more complete objective description of weekly player training loads can be obtained. Finally, although this study explored the effect of situational factors on key match activity profile variables, additional studies are required to better understand these relationships. Such research could provide a framework for the evaluation of player activity demands during key match periods with implications for player substitution strategies and training approaches that optimally prepare players for such key match periods.
