Loneliness in Early Adolescence: Friendship Quantity,
Friendship Quality, and Dyadic Processes
Gerine M. A. Lodder
Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen
Ron H. J. Scholte
Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen; and Praktikon
Luc Goossens
Research Group School Psychology and Child and Adolescent Development, KU Leuven
Maaike Verhagen
Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen
Friendship quantity and quality are related to adolescent loneliness, but the exact link between
these constructs is not well understood. The present study aimed to examine whether adolescents’ perception of friendship quantity and quality, and the perceptions of their peers, were
related to loneliness. We examined the relation between loneliness and the number of unilateral
and reciprocal friendships and compared the views of best friendship quality. Overall, 1,172
Dutch adolescents (49.1% male, M age = 12.81, SD = .43) nominated their friends and rated
their friendship quality. Friendship quantity was measured using sociometrics to distinguish
reciprocated and unilateral (i.e., one-sided) friendships. The analyses indicated that loneliness
was related to fewer reciprocal and unilateral-received friendships (i.e., the adolescent received
a friendship nomination but did not reciprocate that nomination) and a lower quality of best
friendship. Actor–partner interdependence analyses revealed that adolescents’ loneliness was
related to a less positive evaluation of their friendship, as reported by adolescents themselves
(i.e., a significant actor effect) but not by their friends (i.e., nonsignificant partner effect). These
findings (a) indicate that loneliness is negatively related to the number of friends adolescents
have, as perceived by themselves and their peers and (b) suggest that, once a friendship is
established, lonely adolescents may interpret the friendship quality less positively compared to
their friends. Implications of these findings for our current understanding of adolescent loneliness are discussed, and suggestions for future research are outlined.
Loneliness is usually defined as a negative emotional reaction to experiencing unsatisfactory quantity or quality of
social relations (Perlman & Peplau, 1981). The consequences of loneliness can be severe and lead to both physical and mental health problems such as social anxiety,
depression, and cardiovascular problems (Heinrich &
Gullone, 2006). Although most studies on the effects of
loneliness have been conducted among adults, loneliness
also affects health outcomes in adolescence (Qualter,
Brown, et al., 2013). Loneliness can have direct consequences for the daily lives of adolescents because it is
related to lower school adjustment (Aikins, Bierman, &
Parker, 2005). In the present study, we focused on early
adolescence. Loneliness can be experienced throughout the
lifespan but seems to peak during early adolescence
(Heinrich & Gullone, 2006). This may be because the
most important developmental tasks in early adolescence
include gaining acceptance within a peer group and initiating and maintaining friendships, which makes social relationships especially important in this period (Buhrmester,
Correspondence should be addressed to Gerine M. A. Lodder,
Grote Rozenstraat 19, 9712 TG Groningen, The Netherlands. E-mail:
g.m.a.lodder@rug.nl
Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology, 46(5), 709–720, 2017
Copyright © Society of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology
ISSN: 1537-4416 print/1537-4424 online
DOI: 10.1080/15374416.2015.1070352
1990; Parkhurst & Hopmeyer, 1999). In addition, in this
period, adolescents experience the transition to a new
school, which is also related to an increase in loneliness
(Kingery, Erdley, & Marshall, 2011; Van Roekel, Scholte,
Verhagen, Goossens, & Engels, 2010).
LONELINESS AND FRIENDSHIPS
One of the core features of loneliness is the experience of a
low quality or quantity of social relations (Weeks & Asher,
2012). Empirical research has revealed that loneliness is
related to fewer reciprocated (i.e., mutual) friendships and
lower perceived friendship quality (Jobe-Shields, Cohen, &
Parra, 2011; Kingery et al., 2011; Nangle, Erdley, Newman,
Mason, & Carpenter, 2003; Parker & Asher, 1993; Pedersen,
Vitaro, Barker, & Borge, 2007). As of yet, it is unclear
whether the low friendship quality and quantity in the social
worlds of lonely adolescents are actual or merely perceived
by adolescents as less positive. In the present study, we aimed
to extend the knowledge base in this area by comparing
adolescents’ views of their social world, specifically regarding friendship quantity and quality, with the views of their
peers and relate these perceptions to loneliness.
RECIPROCAL AND UNILATERAL FRIENDSHIPS
Loneliness may be related to different aspects of friendship
quantity and quality. Previous research has focused only on
reciprocal friendships, that is, mutual friendships in which
both adolescents perceive each other as a friend (e.g.,
Nangle et al., 2003; Parker & Asher, 1993). Some researchers have argued that friendships exist only if both parties
recognize the friendship (e.g., Rubin, Bukowski, & Parker,
2006), whereas others have argued that unilateral friendships (i.e., one-sided friendships) are just as relevant for
adolescent adjustment (e.g., Berndt & McCandless, 2009).
Indeed, reciprocal friendships are stronger compared to unilateral friendships in terms of stability, quality, and lack of
conflict. However, unilateral friends also differ from nonfriends in terms of the time unilateral friends spend together
and the quality of the relationship (Ciairano, Rabaglietti,
Roggero, Bonino, & Beyers, 2007; Newcomb & Bagwell,
1995; Vaughn, Covin, Azria, Caya, & Krzysik, 2001). Thus,
it is conceivable that unilateral friendships may also be
important for loneliness.
Within unilateral friendships, a distinction can be made
between unilaterally given nominations (i.e., the adolescent
gives a friendship nomination to a peer, but this nomination
is not reciprocated) and unilaterally received nominations (i.e.,
the adolescent receives a friendship nomination from a peer but
does not reciprocate this nomination; Berndt & McCandless,
2009). This distinction is meaningful, as both types of friendships seem to be differently related to adjustment (Scholte
et al., 2009). Although loneliness has been related to friendship
quantity in previous research, some researchers have argued
that only friendship quality but not friendship quantity is
related to loneliness (Qualter & Munn, 2005; Qualter,
Rotenberg, et al., 2013). To ensure that the results regarding
friendship quantity do not merely reflect friendship quality, we
controlled for the effects of network friendship quality (i.e.,
adolescents’ overall attachment to their broader friendship network) in our analyses of friendship quantity.
BIAS HYPOTHESIS
In the literature, opposing views have been proposed to explain
why loneliness is related to lower friendship quantity and
quality. Social needs models (Baumeister & Leary, 1995;
Cacioppo & Hawkley, 2009; Cacioppo et al., 2006; Gardner,
Pickett, Jefferis, & Knowles, 2005; Weiss, 1973) state that all
human beings have a universal need to belong—a need to have
social contacts with others—and that loneliness is experienced
when this need is not being met. The need to belong may be
restored by paying more attention to social cues in the environment and using the information provided by these cues to
connect with others (Gardner et al., 2005). Loneliness is
thought to be related to heightened attention to social cues
(Cacioppo & Hawkley, 2009; Gardner et al., 2005). In fact,
loneliness may be related to hypervigilance to negative social
cues, which makes lonely individuals hyperaware of signs of
rejection, and it could make them believe that they have fewer
possibilities for friendships and lower friendship quality than
they actually have (Cacioppo & Hawkley, 2009; Qualter,
Rotenberg, et al., 2013; Vanhalst, Luyckx, Scholte, Engels,
& Goossens, 2013). According to this view, the most important source of loneliness is a negative perception of one’s social
environment. We refer to this view as the bias hypothesis.
DEFICIT HYPOTHESES
Alternatively, loneliness may be related to actual differences
in the social environment. These differences could be due to
social skills deficits of lonely individuals. Lonely adolescents may lack certain social skills to form successful
friendships or possess undesirable behavioral characteristics, making them an unpopular friendship choice and influencing the quality and quantity of their friendships (JobeShields et al., 2011; Woodhouse, Dykas, & Cassidy, 2012).
Thus, according to this social skills deficit view, the actual
social environment rather than adolescents’ interpretation of
the environment is an antecedent of loneliness. Lonely
adolescents may or may not be aware of their low social
standing. On the one hand, lonely individuals may be very
aware of their lower social skills and social standing and
accurately perceive their social environment negatively. We
call this the recognized deficit hypothesis. On the other
710 LODDER, SCHOLTE, GOOSSENS, VERHAGEN
hand, lonely adolescents with underdeveloped social skills
may be unaware of their low social standing. We call this
the unrecognized deficit hypothesis. In sum, different
hypotheses exist to explain why lonely adolescents experience low friendship quantity and quality, relating to how
adolescents themselves and their peers view the social world
of lonely adolescents.
LONELINESS IN RELATION TO FRIENDSHIP
QUANTITY
Each of these hypotheses implies different expectations
regarding friendship quantity (for an overview, see
Table 1). If the bias hypothesis were correct, lonely individuals would have a negative view of their social environment, whereas their peers would have a neutral view of the
lonely adolescents’ social standing. This would result in
negative relations of loneliness with reciprocal relations
and unilateral given friendships, because lonely adolescents
would perceive few opportunities for friendship in their
environment. Under the bias hypothesis, lonely adolescents
receive an equal number of nominations from their peers but
reciprocate only a few of these. Therefore, this hypothesis
proposes that loneliness is positively related to unilateral
received friendships. According to the recognized deficit
hypothesis, lonely adolescents have a negative view of
their social environment (i.e., they perceive few friendships),
and their peers agree with this view. This would suggest a
negative relation between loneliness and all measures of
friendship quantity. Finally, considering the unrecognized
deficit hypothesis, we assume that lonely adolescents are
unaware of their social standing and thus have a neutral
view of their social environment. Their peers, however, have
a negative view of the adolescents’ social standing.
Consequently, lonely adolescents will nominate an average
number of peers as friends but receive only few nominations
in return. This would result in a positive relation between
loneliness and unilateral given friendships (i.e., lonely adolescents will have more unreciprocated friendships) as well
as a negative relation of loneliness with reciprocal and
unilateral received friendships.
LONELINESS IN RELATION TO FRIENDSHIP
QUALITY
To obtain a more detailed view of the relation between
loneliness and friendship quality, we focused on the quality
of the best friendship, which is the most commonly
researched type of friendship quality, and it might also be
the most important for adolescent adjustment (Berndt &
McCandless, 2009). We used a dyadic approach to examine
the relation between loneliness and friendship quality. This
is important, because the interpretation of best friendship
quality by lonely adolescents is not independent of the
interpretation of their best friends; therefore, they cannot
be treated as independent data (Burk & Laursen, 2005;
Cillessen, Jiang, West, & Laszkowski, 2005; Parker &
Asher, 1993). In addition, earlier research showed that children tend to select other children based on their level of
loneliness and that children in best friendships may become
more alike in loneliness over time (Mercer & DeRosier,
2010). Thus, both loneliness and friendship quality evaluations of best friends are interdependent, and this interdependency should be taken into account (Cillessen et al., 2005).
Some studies have randomly selected one of two friends to
adjust for dependency in the data (e.g., Bagwell et al.,
2005), whereas others have used the Actor–Partner
Interdependence Model for Indistinguishable Dyads
(APIM; Olsen & Kenny, 2006). Using this model, the data
from both friends can be included. The APIM has been used
in earlier research to control for interdependencies between
best friends’ evaluations of the friendship (e.g., Burk &
Laursen, 2005) but never in relation to loneliness.
Two types of effects can be established using APIM.
First, adolescents’ own loneliness can be related to friendship quality, as judged by adolescents themselves (i.e., a
significant actor effect can emerge). Second, adolescents’
own loneliness can be related to the experience of friendship
quality, as reported by their partner (i.e., a significant partner effect can emerge). Table 1 also shows the expectations
for friendship quality based on the three hypotheses. If the
bias hypothesis is correct, loneliness will be related negatively to adolescents’ own evaluation of the friendship (i.e.,
a significant actor effect will occur) but will be unrelated to
their friends’ evaluation of the friendship (i.e., the partner
effect will be nonsignificant). According to the recognized
deficit hypothesis, both actor and partner effects will be
significant. This indicates that loneliness is related to a
negative evaluation of best friendship quality by both
TABLE 1
Expected Relations Between Loneliness and Friendship Quantity
and Quality According to Different Hypotheses
Theoretical Hypothesis
Aspect Bias
Recognized
Deficit
Unrecognized
Deficit
Nominations Given Negative Negative ns
Nominations Received ns Negative Negative
Reciprocated Negative Negative Negative
Unilateral Given Negative Negative Positive
Unilateral Received Positive Negative Negative
FQ Self Negative Negative ns
FQ Best Friend ns Negative Negative
Note: ns = not significant; FQ = friendship quality.
ADOLESCENT LONELINESS AND FRIENDSHIPS 711
adolescents themselves and their best friends. In contrast,
according to the unrecognized deficit hypothesis, the partner
effect will be significant but the actor effect will be nonsignificant or positive. This indicates that friends of lonely
adolescents view their friendship negatively, whereas adolescents themselves have either a neutral or a positive view
of their friendships (Qualter & Munn, 2005; Qualter,
Rotenberg, et al., 2013).
THE PRESENT STUDY
In sum, the present study aimed to examine whether lower
friendship quantity and quality of lonely individuals are due
to their own perceptions of their social world or the social
environments’ response to the lonely individual, or both.
Expectations according to these three views are summarized
in Table 1. Regression analyses were used to examine
whether loneliness was positively or negatively related to
the number of reciprocal and unilateral friendships. We were
particularly interested in the unilateral relations because
these allowed us to examine whether fewer reciprocal relations resulted from the view held by lonely adolescents
themselves (bias hypothesis), their environment (unrecognized deficit hypothesis), or both (recognized deficit hypothesis). To compare views on friendship quality between
adolescents themselves and their best friends, we used an
APIM model.
Little is known about the role of gender in the relationship between loneliness and friendship quantity and quality. A few studies explored gender differences in the
relation between loneliness and friendship quantity or
quality and found no moderation by gender (Nangle
et al., 2003; Parker & Asher, 1993). However, although
most studies found no gender differences in the occurrence
of loneliness, earlier research provided some evidence to
support gender differences in friendships, such as a higher
friendship quality among girls (Heinrich & Gullone, 2006;
Hoza, Bukowski, & Beery, 2000; Maccoby, 2002). In
addition, earlier research showed that girls may have stronger communal needs (i.e., need for interpersonal closeness)
in friendships and that not meeting these needs is related to
loneliness for girls but not for boys (Zarbatany, Conley, &
Pepper, 2004). This implies that not meeting needs for
interpersonal closeness in terms of friendship quality
might be more strongly related to loneliness for girls than
for boys. We therefore explored whether gender differences occurred in the relation between gender and friendship-related constructs. In addition, we controlled for the
possible confounding effects of both social anxiety and
depressive symptoms, which have been found to be related
to both loneliness and aspects of friendship such as perceived support from close friendships (Hutcherson &
Epkins, 2009).
METHOD
Procedure
Seven secondary schools participated after being informed
about the study aims and design through written and personal
communication. We included participants after obtaining
passive parental consent for participation and active consent
from the adolescents themselves. All data were collected
during regular school hours. Data collection took approximately 30–50 min. Participants completed the questionnaires
individually on a computer in the presence of graduate students involved in the project. Adolescents received a small
gift (e.g., a pen) for their participation. Ethical approval was
obtained from the Institutional Review Board of the Radboud
University Nijmegen (ECG2012-2711-701).
Participants
Overall, 1,361 students from 52 different classes were
approached to participate in the study. Parents of all students
in the participating schools received a letter with information about the study. If they did not wish their child to
participate in the study, they could indicate this via post,
e-mail, or phone. Parents of 47 adolescents (3.45%) indicated that they did not want their child to participate. In
addition, active consent was obtained from all but three
adolescents themselves.
At the time of the data collection, 81 adolescents were absent
due to illness or for other reasons. In addition, 49 adolescents
were removed from the analyses because they nominated themselves as friends in the classroom or they nominated everybody
in the classroom, which raises questions about the reliability of
their friendship nominations. Finally, nine adolescents were not
included because they used incorrect identity codes, which
made it impossible to determine who they were. The final
sample consisted of 1,172 students (49.1% male). Not all students completed all measures due to planning issues at some of
the schools (see Table 2). All students were in the first grade of
Dutch secondary school (comparable to U.S. Grade 7) with a
mean age of 12.81 years (SD = .43 year). Classes varied in size
from 17 to 32 students. Adolescents remained in the same class
group throughout the day.
Most participants had a Dutch ethnic background (94.9%),
2.1% were of Turkish or Moroccan descent, and the remaining
students had a different ethnic background. Parental education
was high, with 18.3% of mothers reporting low education
level, 32.2% reporting middle education level, and 5.7%
reporting high education level. Concerning fathers, 15.9%
had low, 28.9% had middle, and 55.2% had high education.
For students themselves, different educational levels within the
Dutch secondary education system were fairly well represented (24.7% of the students attended low to middle level of
education, 45.6% attended middle to high level of education,
and 29.7% attended preuniversity level of education).
712 LODDER, SCHOLTE, GOOSSENS, VERHAGEN
Measures
Loneliness. Loneliness was measured using the
Loneliness in Peer Relations subscale of the Louvain
Loneliness and Aloneness Scale for Children and
Adolescents (Marcoen, Goossens, & Caes, 1987). Because
the friendship-related items of this scale may overlap with
other friendship assessments, we constructed a Pure
Loneliness scale consisting of six not-friendship-related
items (e.g., “I feel alone at school”)
1 measured on a 4-
point scale ranging from 1 (never) to 4 (always). Earlier
research showed that the Louvain Loneliness and Aloneness
Scale for Children and Adolescents is one of the most
reliable measures of loneliness in childhood (Goossens &
Beyers, 2002). Cronbach’s alpha was .85 for the Pure
Loneliness measure (compared to α = .89 for the original
scale). The correlation between the original scale and pure
scale was high (r = .95, p < .001).
Number of Friends. To determine the number of
friendships within the classroom, we first asked
adolescents to select their best friend’s name from a list of
all students in their classroom. After that, adolescents could
select other friends within the classroom by clicking on their
names. If adolescents did not have any friends in the
classroom, they could click a button “I can’t name
anyone.” Adolescents who were not present during data
collection but were nominated in the class (11.5%) were
dropped, because it could not be determined whether these
nominations were reciprocal or unilateral.
Number of reciprocal friends. The number of reciprocal friends was calculated by counting all friendship
nominations by participants and their classmates (i.e.,
mutual nominations).
Number of unilateral-given friends. The unilateralgiven friendships were all friendships in which the participant nominated a classmate as one of their friends but this
classmate did not nominate the participant.
Number of unilateral-received friends. The unilateral-received friendships were all friendships in which the
participant received a nomination from a classmate but the
participant did not nominate this classmate as a friend.
Best Friendship Quality. The quality of the
relationship with the best friend was measured using the
Satisfaction and Commitment subscale of a short version of
the Investment Model Scale (Branje, Frijns, Finkenauer,
Engels, & Meeus, 2007). Adolescents answered eight
questions about their relationship with their best friend,
measured on a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (do not agree
at all) to 5 (totally agree). For each question, the name of the
student nominated as the best friend in the classroom was
filled in. For example, if Jane S. was nominated, one of the
questions would be “My friendship with Jane S. is almost
perfect.” The Investment Model Scale has been used
successfully in earlier research on friendships, and it has
good reliability and predictive validity (Branje et al., 2007).
Cronbach’s alpha was also high in our sample (α = .88).
Network Friendship Quality. Friendship quality
within the broader network was measured using the Peer
subscale of the short version of the Inventory of Parent and
Peer Attachment scale (Armsden & Greenberg, 1987; Raja,
TABLE 2
Sample Size, Means, and Standard Deviations for Loneliness, Control Variables, Friendship Quality, and Number of Nominations
Total Girls Boys
Measure N M SD M SD M SD T
Loneliness 1,171 8.93 3.36 9.14 3.52 8.70 3.16 –2.25*
Friendship Quality
Best Friend 1,138 33.08 4.49 34.46 4.19 31.63 4.35 –11.17***
Network 1,095 36.84 5.20 37.94 5.46 35.74 4.68 –7.16***
Friend Nominations
Given 1,172 5.72 3.52 6.02 3.57 5.41 3.45 –2.98**
Received 1,172 5.47 2.59 5.73 2.65 5.20 2.49 –3.56***
Reciprocal 1,172 3.48 2.11 3.75 2.21 3.21 1.96 –4.45***
Unilat. Given 1,172 1.78 2.26 1.84 2.25 1.72 2.28 –0.88
Unilat. Received 1,172 1.99 1.89 1.98 1.95 1.99 1.83 0.06
Depressive Symptoms 1,139 5.69 4.65 6.50 4.94 4.86 4.18 –6.03***
Social Anxiety 1,117 14.43 3.57 15.15 3.71 13.70 3.26 –6.94***
Note: Unilat. = unilateral.
**p < .01. ***p < .001.
1 All analyses were also performed using the original Loneliness scale.
These analyses yielded similar results, with one exception: No difference
was found between boys and girls in loneliness scores using the original
Loneliness scale.
ADOLESCENT LONELINESS AND FRIENDSHIPS 713
McGee, & Stanton, 1992). This scale consists of 12 items
measuring attachment to friends on a 4-point scale ranging
from 1 (almost never) to 4 (almost always; e.g., “I feel my
friends are good friends”). Of these items, five are reverse
coded. The Inventory of Parent and Peer Attachment scale
has good reliability and validity (Armsden & Greenberg,
1987). Cronbach’s alpha was also acceptable in the present
study (α = .79).
Control Variables
Depressive Symptoms. Depressive symptoms were
assessed using the Iowa short form of the Center for
Epidemiological Studies Depression scale (Kohout,
Berkman, Evans, & Cornoni-Huntley, 1993), which
consists of 11 items measuring the prevalence of depressive
symptoms during the past week (e.g., “I was sad”). The
responses were measured on a 4-point scale ranging from 0
(rarely or never, < 1 day) to 3 (usually or always, 5–7 days).
Two items were reverse coded. Actual scores ranged from 0
to 31, with higher scores indicating a higher prevalence of
depressive symptoms (Cronbach’s α = .81).
Social Anxiety. Social anxiety was measured using the
Dutch version of the Social Phobia subscale of the Screen for
Child Anxiety Related Emotional Disorders (Bodden,
Bogels, & Muris, 2009). This scale consists of nine items
scored on a 3-point scale ranging from 1(almost never) to 3
(often; e.g., “I am shy”). Actual scores ranged from 9 to 27,
with higher scores indicating higher prevalence of social
anxiety symptoms (Cronbach’s α = .80).
Data Analyses Plan
To examine the relationship between loneliness and friendship quantity, we used hierarchical multiple regression analyses, which were estimated in Mplus Version 6 (Muthén &
Muthén, 1998–2010). We estimated parameters using the
maximum likelihood estimator with robust standard errors,
which uses the FIML procedure for missing values. All
predictor variables were standardized. This estimator was
used because not all variables were normally distributed. All
predictor variables were centered before the analyses.
Unstandardized results and STDYX standardized results
are reported. In the first step, we added the main effects of
all friendship-related variables (i.e., network friendship
quality, number of reciprocal friends, number of unilateralgiven friends, and number of unilateral-received friends)
and gender. In the second step, we added interactions
between gender and all friendship variables. Finally, we
tested the most parsimonious model that included all friendship quantity items, network friendship quality, and all
gender-related effects that reached significance. This model
is described in the Results section.
If loneliness is indeed related to friendship quantity,
loneliness could also be related to having a best friend,
which may affect our analyses regarding the relation
between loneliness and friendship quality within best friend
dyads. We used logistic regression to examine whether
loneliness was related to the likelihood of having a best
friend, compared to not nominating a best friend or having
a unilateral best friend (i.e., nominating a classmate who
does not nominate the participant as best friend). First, we
tested a model including loneliness, gender, and the interaction between loneliness and gender. Second, we tested a
model that included significant effects only. Third, we
explored variability of loneliness scores in adolescents
who had a reciprocal best friendship.
Finally, we examined whether loneliness was related to
the quality of the best friendship using an APIM model for
indistinguishable dyads (Olsen & Kenny, 2006; see
Figure 1). We included only the same-sex dyads and ran
this model. After running the basic APIM model, we used
multiple-group comparison to examine gender differences in
the actor or partner effects using a log-likelihood difference
test. We ran a model with all paths restricted to be the same
between boys and girls and compared this model to a model
in which the actor and partner effects were freely estimated
for boys and girls. Next, we examined whether the difference between dyad members’ loneliness scores were related
to the outcomes using an actor–partner interaction (Kenny
Loneliness
Person 1
Loneliness
Person 2
Friendship Quality
Person 1
Friendship Quality
Person 2
–.24***
–.24***
–.03
–.03
.26** .31***
FIGURE 1 Actor Partner Interdependence Model for the effects of both adolescents’ loneliness on their own and the others’ friendship quality.
**p < .01. ***p < .001.
714 LODDER, SCHOLTE, GOOSSENS, VERHAGEN
& Cook, 1999). STDYX standardized results are reported.
For all analyses, we examined whether the results remained
the same after adding depression and social anxiety as
covariates. Because all effects related to friendship quantity
and quality in all analyses reached the same significance
level after controlling for depression and social anxiety, we
report models only without these control variables in the
Results section.
RESULTS
Descriptives and Correlations
Table 2 summarizes the means and standard deviations for
loneliness, friendship quantity and quality, and control variables for the total sample and separately for boys and girls.
This table shows that girls had higher loneliness scores
compared to boys. In line with earlier research, girls also
experienced higher friendship quality compared to boys,
gave and received more nominations, and had a higher
number of reciprocal friendships. To test whether clustering
of loneliness occurred within different classrooms that were
included in the analyses, we calculated the intraclass correlation between adolescents in classrooms for loneliness. The
ICC was .02, indicating that only around 2% of the variation
in loneliness could be explained by a class effect. Therefore,
the analyses were run without controlling for the clustering
of adolescents within classes.
Table 3 displays correlations between loneliness and all
other constructs, showing a similar pattern for boys and
girls. Reciprocal friendships were related to a higher number
of unilateral-given friendships and a lower number of unilateral-received friendships. Loneliness was unrelated to
unilateral-given friendship nominations and negatively
related to all other measures of friendship quantity and
quality. Finally, higher loneliness was moderately associated
(i.e., .30 < r < .50) with both depressive symptoms and
social anxiety.
The Fisher r-to-z transformation was used to compare the
strength of correlations between loneliness and all constructs for boys and girls separately. Significant differences
were found only in the negative relation between loneliness
and best friendship quality (Z = –2.41, p = .016) and in the
positive relation between loneliness and depression (Z =
2.40, p = .016). Both correlations were stronger for girls
than for boys.
Loneliness and Friendship Quantity
We examined whether interactions between gander and
measures of friendship quantity or quality were related to
loneliness. Because none of these interactions reached significance, the results without gender interactions are
reported in Table 4. In total, the model explained 26% of
the variance in loneliness, F(5, 1088) = 75.92, p < .001. The
results indicated that network friendship quality contributed
negatively to feelings of loneliness. Controlling for the
effects of friendship quality, friendship quantity was also
related to loneliness. Both the number of reciprocal friendships and unilateral-received friendships were negatively
TABLE 3
Correlations Between Loneliness, Friendship Quantity, Friendship Quality, and Control Variables for Girls and Boys
Measure 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10.
1. Loneliness –.49*** –.37*** –.09* –.24*** –.19*** .04 –.11* .57*** .45***
2. FQ – Network –.45***` .49*** .03 .13* .12* –.05 .04 –.45*** –.41***
3. FQ – BF –.24*** .40*** .08 .15*** .18*** –.03 .01 –.21*** –.19***
4. N Given –.15*** –.14** .06 .34*** .73*** .77*** –.36*** –.00 –.03
5. N Received –.28*** .21*** .19*** .29*** .69*** –.09* .58*** –.06 –.11*
6. N Reciprocal –.24*** –.18*** .15** .69*** .69*** .18*** –.19*** –.05 –.09*
7. N Unilat. Given –.01 .05 –.02 .79*** –.11* .18*** –.33*** .03 .02
8. N Unilat. Received –.13** .10* .11* –.34*** .63*** –.14** –.34*** –.03 –.05
9. Depression .47*** –.43*** –.23*** –.10* –.18*** –.13** –.02 –.11* .43***
10. Social Anxiety .44*** –.37*** –.13** –.14** –.13** –.14** –.08 –.03 .40***
Note: Correlations for girls are above the diagonal. Correlations for boys are below the diagonal. FQ = friendship quality; BF = best friend. Unilat. =
unilateral.
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.
TABLE 4
Regression Analysis Predicting Loneliness From Friendship Quality
and Friendship Quantity
Predictor B SE B β
Gender 1.21 .18 .18***
Network Friendship Quality –.29 .02 –.45***
N Reciprocal –.26 .05 –.17***
N Unilateral Given .01 .04 .00
N Unilateral Received –.20 .05 –.12***
Note: Adjusted R2 = .26.
***p < .001.
ADOLESCENT LONELINESS AND FRIENDSHIPS 715
related to loneliness, but the number of unilateral-given
friendships was not related to loneliness. Thus, adolescents
who tended to report higher feelings of loneliness also tended
to experience lower friendship quality, have fewer reciprocal
friends, and have fewer instances in which they were nominated by a classmate whom they did not nominate back.
Tolerance levels and variance inflation factor (VIF) were
within acceptable range for all analyses (i.e., Tolerance > .2,
VIF < 5).
Loneliness in Relation to the Likelihood of Having a
Best Friend
In total, 2.8% of the adolescents did not nominate a best
friend in their class, 49.3% had a reciprocal best friend (i.e.,
the first nominated friend), 40.0% had a unilateral best
friend (i.e., they nominated a classmate who did not reciprocate the nomination), and 7.6% nominated a best friend
who was not present during data collection, thereby making
it impossible to determine whether this nomination was
reciprocal or unilateral. Logistic regression showed that
the interaction between gender and loneliness had no significant effect on the likelihood of having a best friend
compared to having a unilateral best friend or not nominating a best friend (odds ratio [OR] = 1.07), 95% confidence
interval (CI) [.99, 1.16]. A model that included only gender
and loneliness showed that being a girl was related to a
higher likelihood of having a reciprocal friend (OR = 1.32),
95% CI [1.04, 1.68], and loneliness was related to a lower
likelihood of having a reciprocal best friend (OR = .91),
95% CI [.87, .94].
The results from this analysis indicate that very lonely
participants may not be represented in the sample of adolescents with a reciprocal best friend. However, there was
sufficient variability in loneliness scores among participants
who had a reciprocal best friendship (i.e., M = 8.41, SD =
2.91, range = 6–23 for the sample of participants with a
reciprocal best friend, and M = 8.92, SD = 3.36, range =
6–23 for the total sample). Therefore, we felt confident in
further examining the relationship between loneliness and
friendship quality within best friend dyads.
Perceptions of Quality Within Best Friend Dyads
In all, 281 best friendship dyads were identified in the
sample. Of these dyads, 126 were male, 150 were female,
and five were mixed gender. We analyzed the data for
same-gender dyads only, because there were too few
mixed-gender dyads to perform the analyses. The model
described in Figure 1 was used to examine the relation
between loneliness and friendship quality within best
friend dyads. The model fitted the data well (root mean
square error of approximation = .00, comparative fit index
= 1.00), 90% CI [.00, .04]. The model explained 6.0% of
the variance in friendship quality scores. The results
indicated that best friends’ loneliness scores were interrelated. In addition, friends were alike in their evaluation
of their friendship. In line with expectations, we found a
significant actor effect (β = –.24, p < .001). This finding
indicates that within the dyads, individuals’ loneliness
scores were related to their evaluation of friendship quality. Higher loneliness was related to a lower experienced
friendship quality. However, the partner effect was not
significant (β = –.03, p = .65). This result indicates that
higher loneliness, as experienced by one friend, was unrelated to lower friendship quality, as experienced by other
friend. Multiple group analysis showed similar effects for
both male and female dyads. Similarity between dyad
members’ loneliness scores did not affect the results,
evidenced by a non-significant actor by partner interaction
(β = .14, p = .14).
DISCUSSION
The aims of the present study were to examine the associations among adolescent loneliness, friendship quality, and
friendship quantity. We examined whether lonely adolescents (bias hypothesis), their peers (unrecognized deficit
hypothesis), or both (recognized deficit hypothesis) held
negative views of the social world of lonely adolescents in
terms of friendship quantity and quality. We explored the
relationship between loneliness and unilateral friendships
and the relationship between loneliness and friendship quality within best friend dyads. Our findings indicated that
loneliness was negatively related to two aspects of friendship quantity (i.e., number of reciprocal and unilateralreceived friendships, as assessed through peer nominations)
and to friendship quality as experienced by adolescents
themselves but not their best friends. Thus, the findings
regarding friendship quantity seem to be in line with the
recognized deficit hypothesis, whereas the findings regarding friendship quality are more in line with the bias hypothesis. However, our findings do not provide unequivocal
support for any one of the hypotheses and are open to
various interpretations.
Our findings showed that loneliness was negatively
related to the number of unilateral-received friendships.
We did not find evidence that loneliness was related to
unilateral-given friendships. The finding that lonely adolescents have fewer unilateral-received friendships could indicate that lonely adolescents may not be perceived as
interesting by their peers. Indeed, loneliness was related to
lower popularity (Gorman, Schwartz, Nakamoto, &
Mayeux, 2011). Alternatively, lonely adolescents may not
send out signals to indicate that they would want to befriend
others. Indeed, loneliness was related to a lower number of
given friendship nominations. Therefore, their classmates
may simply not be aware that lonely individuals want to
form friendships. Indeed, loneliness was found to be related
716 LODDER, SCHOLTE, GOOSSENS, VERHAGEN
to high social withdrawal and shyness in social interactions
(Jobe-Shields et al., 2011), possibly due to fear of rejection
(Qualter, Rotenberg, et al., 2013), which limits the opportunities to befriend others. Consequently, lonely adolescents’
negative views of the social world may also decrease the
number of friendship relations.
Regarding friendship quantity, we found no evidence that
lonely adolescents evaluate their social world more negatively compared to reality, which would have become apparent in a high number of unilateral-received friendships. We
also found no evidence that lonely adolescents are not aware
of their low social standing and perceive their social world
more positively compared to reality, which would have been
evidenced by a high number of unilateral-given friendships.
Our findings seem to indicate that lonely individuals are not
a very popular friendship choice and do not see many
opportunities for friendships themselves. This is most in
line with the recognized deficit hypothesis.
Regarding friendship quality, our findings suggest a different interpretation. Here, we find indications that loneliness is related to a negative interpretation of the social
environment, which is in line with the bias hypothesis. We
found that loneliness scores were related to a lower experience of friendship quality, as reported by adolescents themselves (i.e., a significant actor effect), but were unrelated to
the experience of friendship quality reported by their best
friend (i.e., absence of a significant partner effect). These
findings indicate that once a relationship is established,
loneliness does not seem to be indicative of being a poor
friend. The relation between loneliness and lower friendship
quality was evident only in adolescents’ own experiences
but not their friends’ experiences. Friends of more lonely
adolescents did not report lower friendship quality. This
finding contradicts the notion that lonely individuals may
lack social skills or specifically the skills to maintain highquality friendships. Rather, it implies that loneliness is
related to the perception of friendship quality as opposed
to the actual (objective) quality of the relation. This interpretation is in line with earlier studies that showed loneliness to be related to a negative interpretation of the social
surrounding (e.g., Qualter, Rotenberg, et al., 2013).
Alternatively, lonely individuals may not interpret the behavior of their friends more negatively but rather have a higher
standard compared to their less lonely friends of what
friendships should entail, resulting in a lower evaluation of
the same situation (Russell, Cutrona, McRae, & Gomez,
2012).
It is important to note that, based on the present study,
we cannot establish whether the friendships of lonely individuals are only interpreted more negatively or whether
their friendships are objectively of a lower quality.
Possibly, the differences we found between adolescents’
own and their friends’ interpretation reflect actual differences in behavior of the best friends. For instance, lonely
adolescents may be in unequal relationships in which they
invest a lot without reciprocation of this investment from
their best friend. Earlier research among college students
showed that loneliness was related to inequality in investment in relationships and concern with the relative investment in the friendship of both friends (i.e., having an
underbenefitting exchange orientation; Buunk & Prins,
1998). Thus, lonely individuals may not only be more
focused on the investment of both friends, but they may
also receive less than they give from their friends.
Moreover, if lonely adolescents indeed have social skills
difficulties, as the findings regarding friendship quantity
suggest, it may be difficult to be friends with a lonely
adolescent. Future research should examine objective versus
subjective differences in friendship quality of lonely
adolescents.
Because our findings are based on cross-sectional
research, we cannot draw conclusions about directions of
effects. For instance, our finding that loneliness is related to
a negative evaluation of adolescents’ own friendships could
be a sign that loneliness leads to a negative interpretation of
one’s social environment (Qualter, Rotenberg, et al., 2013)
or a sign that low friendship quality leads to feelings of
loneliness. In fact, being in a low-quality friendship may
also cause adolescents to imitate their friends’ shy and withdrawn behavior, thereby limiting their chances of developing satisfactory relationships with others (Berndt, 2002).
Likewise, being lonely may make adolescents an unpopular
friendship choice, but alternatively, having few friends may
cause adolescents to be lonely. Besides the obvious disadvantage of uncertainty about the direction of the effects, the
use of a cross-sectional design has another drawback.
Because we measured friendship only at a single time
point, we could not take into account the duration and
developmental stage of the friendships. Loneliness could
be related to the differences in formation and maintenance
of friendships (Parker & Seal, 1996). The use of longitudinal data would make it possible to consider these developmental stages.
Another limitation of the present study lies in the generalizability of the findings. For instance, we used information about friendships only within the class. Although
earlier research shows that most good friendships in adolescence can be found within the class, other studies also
showed that unpopular children have a higher likelihood
of having friendships outside the school (George &
Hartmann, 1996). This could also be the case for lonely
adolescents. If lonely adolescents fail to find satisfactory
friendships at school, they may search for friendships elsewhere. In addition, we cannot draw conclusions about the
relations between loneliness and friendship quantity and
quality in collectivistic countries based on the present
research. Earlier research indicated that loneliness may be
more strongly related to contact with friends in individualistic rather than collectivistic countries (Lykes &
Kemmelmeier, 2014). In addition, we did not differentiate
ADOLESCENT LONELINESS AND FRIENDSHIPS 717
between dyadic loneliness, which relates to dyadic friendships and closeness with individual friends, and network
loneliness, which refers to fitting in at a group level (Hoza
et al., 2000). Future research should examine whether the
findings in the present study are similar for these two types
of loneliness, because earlier research suggested that distinct
mechanisms may underlie each of these types of loneliness
(Hoza et al., 2000).
Despite these limitations, the present study has a number
of strengths, including its broad set of peer-related variables,
its large sample size, and the use of a sophisticated procedure (i.e., the APIM model), which allowed us to account
for the dependency between best friends’ evaluation of the
quality of their relationship. This type of dependency is
rarely addressed properly in extant research on peer relationships (Cillessen et al., 2005). Our study was the first to
explicitly examine whether loneliness is related to a social
skills deficit or to a biased perception of the adolescents’
social world. This is an important issue, especially because
these views typically suggest very different approaches
toward intervention and prevention. If loneliness is caused
by a difficulty to operate within the social world, evidenced
by a social skills deficit, social skills training may be most
beneficial for lonely adolescents. However, if the most
important cause of loneliness lies in biased perception of
the social environment, cognitive based therapies may benefit lonely adolescents most. Currently, little is known about
effective strategies for the prevention or intervention of
loneliness in adolescence. A review of the intervention
strategies showed that cognition-based interventions were
more effective compared to social-skills-based interventions
or interventions aimed at increasing social support or opportunities for social contact (Masi, Chen, Hawkley, &
Cacioppo, 2011). However, because none of the reviewed
studies included early adolescents and only two studies
included children, we cannot draw conclusions about the
most effective interventions in the young adolescent
population.
Overall, future research is needed to further examine
whether differences in social experiences of lonely adolescents stem from the adolescents themselves, from their
environment, or from both. Our findings seem to suggest
that lonely individuals may indeed experience objective
difficulties in peer relations, which is in line with the
recognized deficit hypothesis, but may also interpret
their social environment more negatively than is warranted, which is in line with the bias hypothesis. Earlier
research suggested that depressed children may exhibit
some social skill difficulties but interpret their functioning
in the social environment negatively over and beyond the
effects of their actual social environment (Rudolph &
Clark, 2001). The same could be true for loneliness:
Lonely individuals may indeed have social skill difficulties, but these difficulties may be amplified by an overly
negative view on their social environment. Future research
could benefit from an approach in which adolescents’
views on their social skills are compared directly to the
views of their peers. In addition, future research could
examine whether friends of more lonely individuals are
indeed less supportive compared to friends of less lonely
individuals, for instance, by using observations or by
comparing lonely adolescents’ evaluations of their friends
to evaluations others have of these same friends.
Furthermore, future research could use a longitudinal
approach and more sophisticated techniques, such as
SIENA, to examine the development of social networks
in relation to loneliness and friendship quality (Snijders,
van de Bunt, & Steglich, 2010). For now, our findings
seem to indicate that there may be truth in both the social
skills hypothesis and the bias hypothesis. Lonely individuals actually have fewer friendship options, and they
seem to interpret their friendships even more negatively
than they actually are.