MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
Meditation, Cognitive Flexibility, and Emotion Regulation:
A Test of Technique
Ashley Figel
Department of Psychology, Eastern Oregon University
PSY 403: Honor’s Thesis
Dr. Zoe Johnson-Ulrich
May 25, 2023
2
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
Meditation, Cognitive Flexibility, and Emotion Regulation:
A Test of Technique
Most people have felt as if their emotions got the best of them at some point in their lives.
During these moments, it can feel impossible to shift one’s attention from the emotionally
charged experience to de-escalate. The ability to shift attention is a key aspect of cognitive
flexibility and has a significant impact on our capacity to regulate our emotions. In fact, it has
been found that tolerance for negative emotional states and emotion regulation are positively
correlated with cognitive flexibility (Arici-Ozcan et al., 2019). Furthermore, psychological
studies have focused on ways to enhance cognitive and emotional processes because the
impairment of these processes is central to many psychiatric disorders (Gu et al., 2015; Millan et
al., 2012; Koole, 2009). One useful method that has been identified by these studies is
meditation, as meditation has been found to increase connectivity between neural networks
associated with emotion and attentional processes (Froeliger et al., 2012). Clinical studies show
support for the use of meditation and a component of meditation, mindfulness, for chronic pain
treatment, personality disorders, attention disorders, and various disorders of emotions (Hofmann
et al., 2011; Marchand, 2013; Rubia, 2009; Sedlmeier et al., 2012). Many clinical therapeutic
approaches have a basis in mindfulness practices, for example, mindfulness-based cognitive
therapy (Segal & Walsh, 2016), dialectical behavior therapy (Linehan, 1987), acceptance and
commitment therapy (Hayes & Wilson, 1994), and mindfulness-based stress reduction program
(MBSR) (Kabat-Zinn et al., 1985; Moore & Malinowski, 2009). However, it is not clear how
these therapeutic techniques lead to benefits for cognitive and emotional processes. Thus, the
current study will attempt to gain insight into the relationship between meditation techniques,
cognitive flexibility, and emotional regulation.
3
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
Although it is unclear which meditation techniques produce the cognitive and emotional
benefits of mindfulness-based therapeutic approaches, several studies have concluded that
meditation has positive effects on the regulation of attention and emotions (Chambers et al.,
2007; Jha et al., 2007), cognitive flexibility (Moore & Malinowski, 2009), memory (Jha et al.,
2010), and overall well-being (Wallace & Shapiro, 2006). However, these studies did not utilize
a specific meditation technique and the length of meditation exposure varied. Chambers et al.
(2007) compared the results of participants after a 10-day intensive mindfulness retreat to a
meditation naïve group. Moore and Malinowski (2009) compared Buddhist meditators that had
completed at least one, 6-week mindfulness meditation retreat, to a meditation naïve control
group. Jha et al. (2010) included two military cohorts and provided 8 weeks of mindfulness
training to one of the cohorts. Wallace and Shapiro (2006) primarily came to their conclusions
based on correlations between general meditation practice and well-being. Jha et al. (2007)
compared participants from an 8-week MBSR cohort to individuals from a 4-week intensive
mindfulness retreat. While Jha et al. (2007) did not explicitly state the meditation type, one could
argue that focused attention meditation (FAM) and open monitoring meditation (OMM) were
included as FAM and OMM are considered foundational to the mindfulness-based stress
reduction program (Khoury et al., 2015). While these studies conclude that meditation and
mindfulness are beneficial for emotion regulation and cognitive control, they do not clearly
define which meditation technique was used. This is an important consideration as Sedlmeier et
al. (2012) found that different meditation techniques yield variable effects on cognitive and
emotional processes. In summation, there are various benefits found with meditation, but it is
unclear what produces the benefit or what type of benefit is generated because the authors either
do not report the type of meditation or the studies use multiple different meditation techniques. It
4
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
is also unclear how much meditation is needed to produce benefits as many studies vary in the
length of time spent meditating. Therefore, consideration of various meditation techniques and
durations is necessary.
FAM, OMM, and loving-kindness meditation (LKM) are among some of the most
frequently utilized styles. In fact, FAM is often considered the starting foundation for many other
types of meditation practice. This style of meditation involves an extended focus on a single
tangible or physical object, such as one’s breath. The FAM practitioner must actively bring
awareness to mind wandering and reorient their attention (Lippelt et al., 2014). As the goal of
FAM is to increase attentional control and reduce emotional reactivity, advanced practitioners of
FAM can maintain a state of hyperfocus with little effort. OMM is typically the next step in
meditation practice after FAM practice has been established. Worth noting, there is little
difference between OMM and FAM; the object of attention in FAM is something tangible or
physical, and the object of attention in OMM is that which rises to one’s awareness (Lippelt et
al., 2014; Yordanova et al., 2020). Thus, OMM involves constant monitoring of mental states
and reorienting to a state of active monitoring. Another type of meditation, loving-kindness
meditation (LKM), is an easy transition for advanced OMM practitioners as the constant
awareness of one’s mental state is an integral component of LKM. A typical LKM session
involves mentally extending love and compassion to oneself, then a loved one, a stranger, and
finally, to an “unlikeable” other. During LKM, practitioners are encouraged to reassess negative
feelings such as hatred and anger and reorient to feelings of compassion and kindness. Thus,
LKM focuses on socio-affective capacities by mentally extending thoughts of kindness and
goodwill to others, while FAM and OMM focus on attention regulation.
5
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
While FAM, OMM, and LKM practices differ in the object of attention, some studies
have identified neural activation patterns common to all three styles. For example, a comparison
of FAM, OMM, and LKM on measures of EEG oscillatory synchronization patterns indicated all
three types of meditation shared a consistent connectivity pattern during meditation (Yordanova
et al., 2020). All three meditation types had a bilateral increase in delta oscillations, a left
hemisphere increase in theta oscillations, and a right hemisphere increase in fast alpha
oscillations (Yordanova et al., 2020). Theta and alpha oscillations have been associated with
“working memory engagement and inhibition of task-irrelevant cortical regions” (Spironelli &
Angrilli, 2010, p. 259). Interestingly, delta waves are typically only seen in healthy adults during
deep stages of sleep and are considered indicative of brain damage or psychiatric disease when
active during wakefulness (Spironelli & Angrilli, 2010). Thus, increased delta activity during
FAM, OMM, and LKM practice may indicate the induction of a deep-sleep-like state while one
practices meditation. Of note, the participants in this study all had approximately 20,000 hours of
meditative practice, therefore these findings may only be typical for advanced FAM, OMM, or
LKM practitioners. However, Yordanova et al. (2020) conclude the specific EEG patterns
identified are indicative of heightened attention and awareness of one’s experiences
(meta-cognition). Overall, this indicates that there are similar connectivity patterns that occur
with various types of meditation. However, while imaging studies provide insight into brain
activity and neural connections, they cannot indicate if, and to what degree, cognitive or
emotional processes may be impacted by the imaged activity. Moreover, research into the impact
of LKM and FAM on cognitive and emotional processes is lacking. One study found reduced
cognitive flexibility with FAM (Wolff & Beste, 2020), and another found moderate effects on
emotional processes with LKM (Hofmann et al., 2015). However, the interpretation of Hofmann
6
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
et al. (2015) is limited as it was uncontrolled and only included subjects with mood disorders. No
studies of FAM and measures of emotion regulation were identified nor were studies of LKM
and cognitive flexibility. Thus, a comparison of LKM and FAM on measures of cognitive
flexibility and emotion regulation is needed to provide insight into the various findings of
imaging studies.
Adding to the neural activity overlap of meditation styles, some studies have found that
meditation also appears to activate specific neural networks. For example, a study of long-term
LKM practitioners identified via structural MRI that LKM practitioners had thicker
fronto-insular cortices than meditation naïve controls (Engen et al., 2018). Furthermore, fMRI
indicated that LKM activates fronto-insular regions bilaterally, and this activation pattern
partially overlapped with the identified increases in the thickness of these regions in those that
meditated (Engen et al., 2018). It is suggested that the overlap between fronto-insular thickness
increases and activation may provide support for meditation-mediated neuroplasticity, which
may enhance cognitive flexibility due to increased connectivity in fronto-insular regions. To
support this theory, FAM has been found to increase gray matter in the insular and frontal
cortices (Lenhart et al., 2020). Important to note, Engen et al. (2018) included a relatively small
cohort size with only 17 LKM practitioners. Additionally, all the practitioners in the LKM study
had meditated for an estimated total of 40,000 hours, practiced for an average of 30 years, and
attended multiple intensive meditation retreats (Engen et al., 2018). The duration and hours of
LKM practiced by the cohort limit the generalizability of the findings. Interestingly, while the
FAM study also had a relatively small cohort size of 27 participants, all participants were
meditation novices and practiced for only 7 weeks before alterations in the insular and prefrontal
regions were found (Lenhart et al., 2020). Therefore, these findings may indicate benefits of
7
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
meditation are possible within a relatively short period regardless of previous meditation
experience. Nevertheless, both studies indicate that LKM and FAM increase the activation of
prefrontal and insular regions. Moreover, the activation of these regions likely influences
emotion regulation and cognitive flexibility due to their association with these processes.
Emotion and attention regulation, and thus cognitive flexibility, are two primary
functions of the fronto-insular cortex. Moreover, the fronto-insular cortex appears to initiate the
switch to the central executive network from the default mode network during cognitively
demanding tasks (Sridharan et al., 2008). The default mode network includes the ventromedial
prefrontal cortex and posterior cingulate cortex and is active when individuals are not focused on
the outside world (Sridharan et al., 2008). The central executive network consists of the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and posterior parietal cortex and is critical not only for working
memory functions but for judgment and decision-making as well (Sridharan et al., 2008). This
explains the increase in theta and alpha oscillations during meditation found by Yordanova et al.
(2020), as these waves are associated with working memory. The fronto-insular cortex contains
the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) and is a key node of the salience network, which
directs our attention to cognitive and emotional stimuli deemed important. The VLPFC has a
well-established connection with affect regulation, particularly when cognitive reappraisal is
necessary to divulge alternative meanings of emotional stimuli (Engen et al., 2018). Additionally,
the salience network includes the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), which has connections with
the limbic (emotional) system and the prefrontal cortex (cognitive system) (Stevens et al., 2011).
Thus, cognitively demanding tasks, like meditation, activate the network responsible for
directing our attention to important cognitive and emotional stimuli (the fronto-insular cortex of
8
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
the salience network), which then activates the network responsible for making judgments and
decisions (the central executive network) based on those stimuli (Fig. 1).
Figure 1
Neural Networks Activated by Meditation
Note. The FIC mediates the shift from the DMN to CEN. The VLPFC is part of the FIC and SN.
The ACC is connected to the limbic and cognitive systems.
The functions of these neural networks, combined with the thickness increases in the
fronto-insular cortex of long-time meditators, indicate the ability to switch between networks is
augmented by meditation. Moreover, an increased ability to switch between networks likely
improves emotional regulation through greater cognitive flexibility. However, a review of FAM,
OMM, and LKM by Lippelt et al. (2014) indicates that distinguishing these meditation types in
any meaningful way on measures of emotion and cognition is lacking. Furthermore, while FAM
and LKM have similar neural activation patterns, these meditation types differ in technique,
which is expected to influence the effect on cognitive and emotional processes based on the
9
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
findings of Sedlmeier et al. (2012) that found variable effects dependent on meditation technique.
Therefore, differences in the degree to which cognitive and emotional processes are affected by
meditation are expected and will vary depending on the technique used.
While it is currently unclear how meditation style influences psychological outcomes,
each one has a different technique that may aid in distinguishing which style yields the most
benefit. For example, LKM has a focus on socio-affective skills, which are processes of the
anterior insula and the ACC (Engen et al., 2018). Moreover, von Economo neurons (VEN) are a
unique cell type found only within the insular and cingulate cortices and are currently only
known to exist in “humans, great apes, elephants, and some cetaceans,” all highly social animals
with large brains (Gogolla, 2017, p. R580). While Sridharan et al. (2008) suggest these neurons
allow the salience network to mediate the switch from the default mode network to the central
executive network, the specific function of these neurons is not clear. Other research indicates
that VENs may be central to fostering social connections and socio-affective skills (Gogolla,
2017). In support of this, VEN numbers are greatly reduced in individuals with neuropsychiatric
disorders that involve impaired social functions, like frontotemporal dementia and early-onset
schizophrenia (Santos et al., 2011). Research also suggests that VEN numbers are abnormal in
those with autism, a disorder characterized by impaired social skills (Santos et al., 2011).
Additional support for the role of VENs in socio-affective processes comes from the conclusion
that insular activity is increased with LKM which, as mentioned previously, has a particular
focus on cultivating socio-affective skills. Overall, it appears the insula and ACC have a direct
impact on attention shifting, which is the basis of cognitive flexibility. These studies also indicate
the insula and ACC have a direct impact on socio-affective and emotional processes that are
likely mediated by VENs. Therefore, as FAM and LKM meditation activate the fronto-insular
10
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
cortex, both emotion regulation and cognitive flexibility should be directly influenced by
meditation practice. However, increases in fronto-insular activity are likely not as great with
FAM due to the cultivation of an inflexible attentional state. Furthermore, considering the likely
role of VENs in socio-affective and emotional processes and attention shifting, greater increases
in these processes with LKM are expected when compared to FAM.
Although FAM is found to increase gray matter, and thus connectivity, in fronto-insular
regions, FAM appears to promote persistent cognitive stability that is not conducive to cognitive
flexibility (Wolff & Beste, 2020). For example, on a measure of task switching Wolff and Beste
(2020) found switch costs increased with a single 15-minute guided FAM session. Switch costs
“reflect processing time when responses are to be switched” (Wolff & Beste, 2020, p. 1484).
This may be explained by the basic principle of FAM to focus on a single object and reduce
mind-wandering. Wolff and Beste (2020) explain that attention to extraneous stimuli is necessary
to evaluate the importance of those stimuli and orient to them when necessary. Thus, FAM
shields other cognitive processes from information outside the current focus and reduces
cognitive flexibility. Interestingly, Stevens et al. (2011) found that amygdala activity was
increased by the suppression of thoughts. As suppression of thoughts is central to FAM, and the
amygdala is part of the limbic system, one could tentatively conclude that FAM would decrease
emotion regulation. Conversely, Stevens et al. (2011) found that amygdala activity decreased
with reappraisal, distraction, and distancing. As the reappraisal of feelings towards others is a
central component of LKM, emotion regulation is expected to increase by LKM. However, as
mentioned previously, there is not currently any research that compares these meditation types on
measures of both cognitive flexibility and emotion regulation.
11
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
This study aims to fill the gap in comparative meditation research, and thus will compare
FAM and LKM on cognitive flexibility and emotion regulation measures. As previously
mentioned, FAM and OMM differ only in the object of attention during practice. Therefore,
OMM will not be included here as this study aims to compare divergent forms of meditation.
Furthermore, the studies discussed previously involved cohorts of advanced meditation
practitioners (Yordanova et al., 2020), or prescribed meditation practice for at least 10 days
(Chambers et al., 2007) and up to 8 weeks (Jha et al., 2010). To date, very little research exists
examining the short-term effects of meditation. In fact, only one study of short-term effects from
either FAM or LKM was identified. In that study, 11 of 19 participants had reduced cognitive
flexibility after a single, 15-minute smartphone app-guided FAM meditation (Wolff & Beste,
2020). Based on these findings, it was expected that a short-term meditation task, such as a
10-minute video-guided meditation, may have some effect. Three other studies of short-term
meditation were identified but the meditation was either OMM (Lin et al., 2020) or a generalized
breath awareness meditation (Wu et al., 2019; Basso et al., 2019). Lin et al. (2020) did not find
any measurable effect on emotion regulation after a brief 20-minute exposure to meditation. In
contrast, Wu et al. (2019) and Basso et al. (2019) found improvements in emotion regulation
measures after meditation, but both studies included brief (13-15 minute) meditation for at least
one week (Wu et al., 2019) and up to 8-weeks (Basso et al., 2019). Therefore, these studies are
more long-term compared to the intended meditation exposure in this study. Thus, this study
aimed to identify if emotion regulation and cognitive flexibility are affected with a single,
10-minute guided FAM or LKM meditation.
Here, we examined the effects of a single exposure to FAM or LKM on cognitive
flexibility and affect regulation tasks in meditation novices. An emotional counting Stroop
12
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
(ecStroop) and Wisconsin Card Sort (WCS) task were administered after a 10-minute guided
LKM or FAM video. The ecStroop is a “variant of the traditional color-naming Stroop task” with
a focus on identifying emotional interference (Brennan et al., 2015, p.1867). Previous studies
have used the ecStroop to assess emotion regulation (Brennan et al., 2015; Whalen et al., 2006).
However, these studies were specifically examining ACC function relative to the amygdala. As
the ACC and amygdala are functionally connected to the fronto-insular cortex, it is assumed that
the ecStroop will also apply here. The WCS task was used to assess cognitive flexibility due to
the understanding that this task is commonly used to assess this aspect of executive functioning
(Meyers et al., 2021). Participants in this study were meditation novices and results were
compared to a non-meditation control group on the same measures.
Based on the conclusion that meditation promotes the connectivity of neural regions
associated with emotional processes, the first hypothesis of this study is that meditation will have
a direct effect on emotion regulation (Fig. 2). Additionally, the studies discussed here
demonstrate that meditation has a direct effect on cognitive flexibility. Therefore, the second
hypothesis of this study is that meditation will have cognitive flexibility-mediated influences on
emotion regulation that differ between LKM and FAM (Fig. 2).
Figure 2
Causal Relationships
13
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
Note. Meditation will have a direct effect on emotion regulation (ER) and cognitive flexibility
(CF). Meditation will also have an indirect effect on emotion regulation that is meditated by
cognitive flexibility.
Methods
Participants
Participants were recruited by contacting psychology professors at Eastern Oregon
University (EOU). Participants’ professors offered extra credit towards students’ overall grade in
one course upon completion of this study. Data collection was completed exclusively online;
thus, participants were able to access the experiment via a URL link that was provided.
Participants were asked to complete this study via Windows laptop or desktop computer with
access to the internet and working speakers. Participants were also asked to complete the
experiment alone in a quiet, non-disruptive environment, and be proficient in the English
language. To ensure confidentiality, participant data was only associated with an ID number.
Additionally, informed consent was obtained before data collection. After participants provided
their electronic signature on the informed consent they were redirected to a new survey where
their data was only associated with an ID number. In total, 114 people completed the informed
consent and first half of the study, but only 49 participants completed the task portion, 45 of
which were female, aged 18-50 years. Twelve participants were randomly assigned to the control
group, 18 to the FAM group, and 19 to the LKM group.
Materials and Instruments
E-prime was used to create a Wisconsin Card Sort and emotional counting Stroop
(ecStroop) task to assess cognitive flexibility and emotion regulation. Guided meditation and
cartoon videos were administered via a YouTube video embedded in Qualtrics. Both guided
14
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
meditation videos displayed a nature photo throughout the entire 10 minutes while a voice
directed them to awareness of their breath (Declutter the Mind, 2020) or to mentally extend
thoughts of gratitude and wellness to others (Declutter the Mind, 2019). The cartoon video was a
10-minute clip of the movie Tom and Jerry: Snowman’s Land (WB Kids, 2022). Questionnaires,
consent forms, and debriefing were also administered via Qualtrics. The Wisconsin Card Sort
task required participants to learn one rule for a response, then shift their response to a new rule
after approximately 10 correct responses (see Appendix). The rules for response were the same
for all participants but order of sorting rule (shape, color, number of items) was randomized for
each participant. The ecStroop task required participants to report the number of words they saw
on a screen, regardless of meaning. Participants had trials that occurred in random order and
contained neutral words (e.g., chance, owl, cork) or negative emotional words (e.g., alone,
broken, crisis) (see Appendix). Participants were also asked questions regarding their current
mood state prior to video exposure and task completion.
Design
This study design was between subjects with three levels. Therefore, participants were
randomly assigned to one of three groups: FAM, LKM, or no meditation. Participants in all
groups completed the same cognitive flexibility and emotional regulation tasks, though the order
of tasks presented to participants was randomized. The dependent variables were cognitive
flexibility and emotional regulation scores, measured with a WCS and ecStroop task.
Procedure
Before the administration of measures, participants first completed an online informed
consent, then a questionnaire that assessed current emotions, previous meditation experience,
age, gender, student status, and employment status. Participants assigned to LKM or FAM
15
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
followed a self-administered 10-minute video-guided meditation. Participants assigned to the
control group watched a 10-minute video of Tom and Jerry cartoons. After video completion, all
participants were assigned the Wisconsin Card Sort and ecStroop tasks, both tasks were
completed via computer, and the order of tasks was randomized. In total, this study took
approximately 35 minutes to complete and concluded with a debriefing.
Data Analysis
Variables for analysis included those in the hypothesized model; meditation was the
independent variable, and cognitive flexibility and emotion regulation were the dependent
variables (Fig. 2). An ANOVA was conducted to compare the control group, LKM, and FAM
groups on the measures of cognitive flexibility and emotion regulation. Further, path analysis
was used to analyze the data from this study as well to consider the indirect relationship of
meditation on emotion regulation through cognitive flexibility. Path analysis is a form of
structural equation modeling that is also viewed as a special case of multiple regression analysis
(Lleras, 2005; Suhr, 2008). This statistical method accounts for variation and relationships within
the measured variables and does not require the specification of relationships between variables
before testing. Thus, all possible relationships are considered and tested between the dependent
and independent variables. Furthermore, path analysis can provide insight into any possible
latent variables and indirect effects of the independent variable on the dependent variable (Suhr,
2008). The path model was tested with Rstudio version 4.2.3.
Results
The first hypothesis of this study was that meditation would have a direct effect on
emotion regulation and the second hypothesis of this study was that meditation would have
cognitive flexibility-mediated influences on emotion regulation that differ between LKM and
16
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
FAM (Fig. 2). ANOVA tests were conducted first to examine the effect of meditation type on
cognitive flexibility and emotion regulation. The Shapiro-Wilk test indicated that the data was
not normal for emotional regulation (p < .001), but upon visual inspection of histograms, they
did not appear strongly skewed or with outliers. However, Levene’s test indicated the variances
with the emotion regulation task were not homogenous (p = .001), so Welch’s ANOVA was used.
The results of Welch’s ANOVA indicate that the difference between the control, LKM, and FAM
groups on the measure of emotional regulation was not significant, (F(2,46) = 1.66, p = .21; Fig.
3).
Figure 3
ecStroop Results with Standard Error.
The data was also not normal for the cognitive flexibility task as indicated by the Shapiro-Wilk
test (p = .005), but also upon visual inspection, did not look strongly skewed or with outliers.
Further, variances for the WCS were homogenous as assessed by Levene’s test (p = .68), so we
continued with the one-way ANOVA. The results of this ANOVA indicate that the difference
17
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
between the control, LKM, and FAM groups on the measure of cognitive flexibility was not
significant (F(2,46) = 0.25, p = .78; Fig. 4).
Figure 4
WCS Results with Standard Error.
Note. The average number incorrect is out of 30 trials.
A path model was used to test the indirect effect of meditation on emotion regulation via
cognitive flexibility (the second hypothesis of this study) and to test for the direct effect of
cognitive flexibility on emotion regulation. The first path analysis compared only the meditation
groups as the control group was initially excluded. Results indicated that meditation did not have
a direct effect on emotional regulation, β(37) = 44.94, SE = 63.02, p = .48, or cognitive
flexibility β(37) = 0.69, SE = 2.50, p = .78 (Fig. 5). There was no direct effect of cognitive
flexibility on emotion regulation β(37) = -5.21, SE = 3.86, p = .18 (Fig. 5). The indirect effect,
tested using the Sobel test and percentile bootstrapping, was not significant β(37) = -3.61, SE =
18
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
17.18, p = .83. A second path analysis was conducted with the meditation groups collapsed into
one and the control group was added as there was no significant difference in the ANOVAS and
no significant effect in the first path analysis. Results indicated that meditation had a marginally
significant effect on emotional regulation β(49) = -251.02, SE = 138.55, p = .07, and no effect on
cognitive flexibility β(49) = -0.41, SE = 2.26, p = .86. There was no direct effect of cognitive
flexibility on emotion regulation β(49) = -1.11, SE = 4.34, p = .80. The indirect effect, tested
using the Sobel test and percentile bootstrapping, was not significant β(49) = -0.46, SE = 10.71,
p = .97.
Figure 5
Path analysis results with control group excluded.
Note. Path A – direct effect of meditation on CF, path B – direct effect of CF on ER, path C –
direct effect of meditation on ER.
Figure 6
19
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
Path analysis results with control group included.
Note. Path A – direct effect of meditation on CF, path B – direct effect of CF on ER, path C –
direct effect of meditation on ER.
Discussion
In this study, the effect of two types of brief meditation exposure on cognitive and
emotional processes was assessed. Emotion regulation was assessed with an emotional counting
stroop task (ecStroop), and cognitive flexibility was assessed with a Wisconsin Card Sort task
(WCS). Prior to task completion, participants were randomly assigned to watch 10 minutes of
FAM, LKM, or cartoons. Then, participants downloaded and completed the WCS and ecStroop
tasks. Based on findings from previous studies, the hypotheses of this study were that meditation
would have a direct effect on emotion regulation and on cognitive flexibility.
The results of the current study indicate that there is no variation in cognitive or
emotional abilities that is dependent on meditation technique. Further, meditation did not directly
impact cognitive flexibility or emotion regulation and there was no effect on emotional
regulation mediated by cognitive flexibility. Thus, the results of the current study do not support
the hypothesis that meditation will have cognitive flexibility-mediated influences on emotion
regulation. This is supported by the study from Basso et al. (2019) that concluded improvements
in emotion regulation were a direct result of meditation and not mediated by any cognitive
20
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
changes. However, while brief meditation did not significantly impact emotional regulation or
cognitive flexibility in the current study, path analysis showed there was a marginally significant
effect of the control group versus the meditation group on emotion regulation. Therefore, the
results of the current study provide moderate support for the hypothesis that meditation will have
a direct effect on emotion regulation. Further, the finding that a brief 10-minute exposure to
meditation may yield measurable results coincides with previous research from Wolff and Beste
(2020). In that study, 11 of 19 participants had a measurable reduction in cognitive flexibility
after a 15-minute guided FAM session. While the results of that study were not in favor of
increased cognitive flexibility, the results indicate that a brief, one-time exposure to meditation
may have measurable effect.
The failure of the current study to fully support the hypotheses may indicate that there is
simply no effect or there was interference by extraneous variables. For example, some
participants may have mood or cognitive patterns that result in poor performance on measures of
these processes. According to Matt et al. (1992), participants’ mood patterns influence the
interpretation of stimuli, and thus, the response patterns to emotional tasks. Participants’
responses to the current mood assessment may be an additional consideration for future analyses.
Further, as this study was completed entirely online, controlling the participants’ environment to
limit distractions was not possible. Future studies in this subject may aim to conduct in-person
studies to eliminate possible distractions and task interference. Additionally, the limited duration
of meditation may have also prevented this study from providing support for the hypotheses.
While Wolff and Beste (2020) found deleterious effects on cognitive flexibility with a single
15-minute FAM session, this has not been the standard for many meditation studies. For
example, Basso et al. (2019) found effect on emotional regulation after 8 weeks of brief (15
21
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
minute) daily meditation, but not when participants were assessed after only 4 weeks. Linn et al.
(2020) did not find any significant effect after a single 20-minute OMM session, and Wu et al.
(2019) found a significant effect with one week of daily meditation. Therefore, it may be that
effects of meditation increase in strength with duration of at least one week. Perhaps this is due
to variation in mood at the time of meditation and the interference of this variable with the effect
of the practice. In other words, participants’ mood at the time of meditation likely influences task
responses, as explained by Matt et al. (1992). Therefore, when exposed to meditation
consistently for at least a week, this interference may not influence emotional and cognitive
abilities as significantly as may be the case with a single meditation session. Thus, as mentioned
previously, participants’ responses to the current mood assessment could be added to a more
complex path analysis if there were a larger sample size. Another potential interference with data
collection includes the method of task delivery. Only 49 participants completed the entire study
out of the 114 participants that completed the survey and watched a video. This indicates that the
download of the task files to complete the cognitive flexibility and emotion regulation tasks was
likely a barrier to completion for many. Future research may aim to identify a different task
delivery software that doesn’t require download to make this process more user-friendly.
An additional reason why the current study failed to support the hypothesis is that there
may not be enough power to yield significant effect due to the lack of a large enough sample
size. Of the 49 participants data files were received for, 19 were assigned to LKM, 18 to FAM,
and 12 to cartoons. A larger sample size would likely increase the power and improve the ability
to detect significant effects. Additionally, any generalizable conclusions may be difficult to
extrapolate from the results as the small sample size consisted only of psychology students and
was comprised almost entirely of females (91.84%). Previous research suggests that females
22
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
react more strongly than males on measures of emotion and possibly respond differently to
mindfulness meditation (Rojiani et al., 2017). It is for this reason that Lin et al. (2020) conducted
their study comprised entirely of females. One likely explanation for the differences between the
sexes on measures of emotion is that female and male brains are structurally different, as
identified with neuroimaging studies. Gur and Gur (2016) explain that female brains have more
inter-hemispheric connections, limbic activity, and orbitofrontal volume than male brains and
these differences are connected to differences between the sexes in emotion regulation. In other
words, the female brain is structurally and functionally conducive to emotion sensitivity.
Important to note, these are all generalizations based on imaging studies and there are more
differences within the sexes than between. However, these observed differences are a likely
explanation for why a majority female meditation study may skew data in favor of meditation.
In summary, the results indicate there was no significant effect of brief meditation on
cognitive flexibility and emotion regulation. However, these findings do not rule out the
possibility of effects due to extraneous variables, duration of meditation, and limited sample size.
Considering the limitations of the current study, the effect of meditation on emotional and
cognitive processes warrants further assessment to confirm if there is a significant difference
between brief LKM and FAM on these processes. A better understanding of how these practices
or stimuli impact our mental capabilities may aid in psychological treatment and personal
wellbeing. Researchers may yield a more definitive answer by conducting a similar study
in-person, utilizing an alternative software for task delivery, and/or utilizing a larger and more
diverse sample size. Overall, this topic is one that is ripe with potential for future studies to
advance the science of meditation.
23
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
24
MEDITATION, COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, AND EMOTION REGULATION
