Top 10 Countries that Make the Best Movies
Each country brings its own unique flavor to the silver screen, from the heart-wrenching dramas of European cinema to the vibrant and dynamic storytelling found in Asian films, not to mention the blockbuster hits and indie gems originating from North America.
When thinking about the countries that have made significant contributions to the film industry, consider the various elements that make their movies stand out. This might include groundbreaking directors, iconic film stars, influential film movements, or even technological innovations that have changed the way we experience movies.
The Top Ten
1India India, officially the Republic of India, is a country in South Asia. It is the seventh-largest country by area, the second-most populous country (with over 1.2 billion people), and the most populous democracy in the world. Its capital is New Delhi. Some other major cities are Mumbai, Chennai, and Ahemdabad. The most spoken languages are Hindi and English, but there are 22 official Indian languages
The Indian film industry is by far the fastest-growing industry in the world. Recent movies like the Bahubali series have clearly shown that movies with higher budgets are going to come sooner. Then definitely, the US industry needs to come up with great ideas for making good stories and everything as such.
Yes, I do agree that the US is far ahead when it comes to the budget they invest and the number of screens they get worldwide. With that, they also hold the highest-grossing movie. But if you consider the development with respect to the time span, the Indian film industry has grown in an exponential manner.
The Indian film industry has many internal industries like Bollywood, Sandalwood, Tollywood, to name a few. This versatile industry within the country gives you a diverse picture and also showcases the movie buff in every single state, highlighting the movie industry's growth in the country.

At the end, I want to say that if you give another 50 years to this Indian industry, you will see this industry being the epicenter of entertainment in the world!
United States of America The United States of America, or the U.S.A. for short, is a federal republic composed of 50 states, 48 of them are contiguous states. There are two other states, Alaska and Hawaii, which are north and south of the contiguous states, respectively. The United States declared its independence from the British Empire in 1776 with the Declaration of Independence. They won their independence in 1783 with... read more
There is one reason America is not number one, and that is because it's number one at a lot of things, and other countries get tired of it, so people vote for other countries. I've seen it on many lists here. Look, I'm not saying anything bad about other countries' movie industries, but India! Come on.
Look, I know they now produce the most movies yearly, and I'm sure there's a lot of great ones, but they don't have the worldwide popularity American movies do. America is one of the few countries whose entertainment, like movies, shows, music, sports, and even porn, is popular worldwide almost everywhere. I'm sorry, but India is not on that scale yet. They may screen in other countries and make some money, but they don't bring in billions, domestic and international, like the US.
Look, there are many, many examples I could use right now, but I'll stick with probably the most worldwide known and loved movie in the world. So let me know when India makes a movie even somewhat close to STAR WARS, and then we can talk about them even being top 5 because I would also say the U.K., Canada, and many European countries are close behind America.
France France, officially the French Republic, is a sovereign state comprising territory in western Europe and several overseas regions and territories. The European part of France, called metropolitan France, extends from the Mediterranean Sea to the English Channel and the North Sea, and from the Rhine to the Atlantic Ocean. France spans 675,000 km2 (251,000 mi2) and has a total population of 67 million... read more
While I think the US deserves to be at the top of the list, France is a very close second. Cinema was born there with the Lumière brothers, and ever since, they have been making great films like The Rules of the Game, The 400 Blows, and Amélie.
France dominated the film industry in the 20th century and has gained an enormous amount of appreciation for its classics ever since. I will even go on to say that it helped shape American filmmaking.
How are Canada, Australia, Iran, Bangladesh, Italy, and Germany ahead of France? I mean, I am sure there are great Italian and German films, but ahead of French films?
Japan Japan is an island country in East Asia in the Pacific Ocean. It lies off the eastern coast of the Asia Mainland (east of China, Korea, Russia) and stretching from the Sea of Okhotsk in the north to the East China Sea and near Taiwan in the southwest.
Japan has a huge capital city called Tokyo, other cities in Japan include Fukuoka, Hiroshima, Osaka, Nagoya and Sendai. It's close to South Korea,... read more
Japan produces the best films from the 1950s to now. Japanese films are so different from other countries, and its visual and emotion hit me every time. Many films from Akira Kurosawa, Yasujiro Ozu, and Hayao Miyazaki are truly some of the best films in the world! (Like: Seven Samurai, Tokyo Story, or Spirited Away)
Japanese movies are awesome. They cover almost all genres, from crazy to emotional. The movies have proper direction. I have liked almost every Japanese movie I have watched. And believe me, I have watched a lot.
Japanese films seem to allow more freedom, and creativity follows. The character development in their films tends to go deeper. Their films just feel unique.
Iran Iran, also known as Persia, officially the Islamic Republic of Iran, is a sovereign state in Western Asia. The capital city is Teheran and the major city is also Tehran. The country's official language is Persian.

Iran is home to one of the world's oldest civilizations, beginning with the formation of the Elamite kingdoms in the fourth millennium BC. The country's rich cultural legacy is reflected... read more
Iranian cinema has changed my mind that you can make low-budget, simple movies without showing any skin and still create masterpieces just due to pure acting skills and direction.
Whether because of or in spite of censorship and social norms, Iranian directors have created more than their fair share of amazing character studies and allegories on meaningful topics. I suspect if there were more films available in the West from Iran, we would appreciate that country's work even more.
Well, I'm Iranian, and I like our movies, and I'm also excited about Korean and American movies. But come on! Indian movies? Are they the best? I've just seen 3 good Indian movies in my whole life. Most of them are stupid! Have you seen the movie in which a guy kills people with a banana skin? Isn't it foolish?
United Kingdom The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, commonly shortened to United Kingdom, UK or Britain is a Sovereign State located of the Northwestern coast of Europe. It is a Parliamentary Constitutional Monarchy currently lead by Monarch Queen Elizabeth II and its current prime minister is Boris Johnson. The UK is a Unitary State consisting of Scotland, England, Wales and Northern Ireland... read more
There isn't really a 'British cinema' to the same extent as there is a 'French cinema,' for instance, because the British film industry is so interconnected with Hollywood. British actors, directors, cinematographers, and others make films in America, and Hollywood makes films in Britain. So, although it's harder to make a case for a distinct British national cinema, it's pretty clear that in terms of filmmaking level and the expertise of film crews, Britain is unrivaled outside Los Angeles.
James Bond, Harry Potter, Monty Python, Wallace and Gromit, Stanley Kubrick's movies (Full Metal Jacket, 2001, Dr. Strangelove, A Clockwork Orange, etc.), The Italian Job ('69), The Wicker Man ('73), In Bruges, Dunkirk, Yellow Submarine, Lawrence of Arabia, The Third Man, Paddington 1 & 2, Chicken Run, Watership Down, The Pink Panther ('63), Breakfast at Tiffany's, and Animal Farm (1954) are some of my favorite movies. And they are all British! Should be 1 or 2.
I'm sorry, is the scary movie crap from the US better than Monty Python? James Bond? Harry Potter? British cinema is not nearly as big as Hollywood and Bollywood, but we make the classics. We have the best comedies in the world, although our action and drama industry is pretty good. Hollywood has quantity but no quality. We have it the other way around.
Italy Italy (Italian: Repubblica Italiana) is a sovereign state and unitary parliamentary republic in south-central Europe.
Italy covers an area of 301,338 km². With almost 62 million inhabitants, it is the third most populous EU member state. Located in the heart of the Mediterranean Sea, Italy shares open land borders with France, Switzerland, Austria, Slovenia, San Marino, and Vatican City. The... read more
Italy is the ultimate filmmaking country. I mean, those guys have directors like Leone, Bertolucci, and Rossellini. Actors and actresses like Marcello Mastroianni and Claudia Cardinale. The best cinematographer (Vittorio Storaro) and the best film composer (Ennio Morricone) are Italians. That should speak for itself. The best of American cinema is directed by Capra, Scorsese, and Coppola, and often stars someone like Pacino or De Niro. Italy, obviously.
Definitely one of the best film cultures worldwide. What makes Italy better than most other countries is that they have both great art films with huge historical importance, with neorealism films and directors like Fellini, Antonioni, Visconti, Pasolini, etc., and also amazing genre films like the Italo Westerns by Leone or Corbucci or the Giallo-Horrors by Dario Argento or Mario Bava.
Italian movies are so wonderful! They have made great movies from the 1940s to today. I love how beautiful their visuals and stories are! My favorite Italian films are Bicycle Thieves, 8 1/2, and Cinema Paradiso.
Serbia Serbia, officially the Republic of Serbia, is a landlocked country in Southeastern and Central Europe, situated at the crossroads of the Pannonian Plain and the Balkans. It shares land borders with Hungary to the north, Romania to the northeast, Bulgaria to the southeast, North Macedonia to the south, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina to the west, and Montenegro to the southwest, and claiming a border... read more
Germany Germany was formally united in 1871 under the initiative of Bismarck with King Wilhelm of Prussia as emperor. The previous 'Holy Roman Empire', basically a continuation of the empire of Charlemagne/Karl der Grosse was dissolved in 1806.
Some territory was lost after World War 1 and a lot more after World War 2, basically started by Hitler's Nazi dictatorship. Then the Soviets kept their zone... read more
I think German movies have more thoughtful stories with characters that show more range. The characters in German movies seem to be multifaceted and not just simple black and white portraits like in many American movies.
The best-known German films are Nosferatu and Metropolis. Who knew Germans were so good at filmmaking? These films are definitely worth checking out. Trust me.
Germany is home to Metropolis, The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari, M, Nosferatu, Wings of Desire, and Das Boot. These are some of the best films of all time. Why is this only #6?
Croatia Croatia, officially the Republic of Croatia (independence since 1991), is a sovereign state at the crossroads of Central Europe, Southeast Europe, and the Mediterranean. Its capital city is Zagreb. It is a member of the European Union. During the Cold War it was part of Yugoslavia. It is a cultural and scientific cradle of such names as: Nikola Tesla, Paula (nobile) Preradović - author of Austrian
The Contenders
Belgium Belgium, officially the Kingdom of Belgium, is a country in Northwestern Europe. The country is bordered by the Netherlands to the north, Germany to the east, Luxembourg to the southeast, France to the southwest, and the North Sea to the northwest. It covers an area of 30,689 km2 (11,849 sq mi) and has a population of more than 11.5 million, making it the 22nd most densely populated country in the... read more
South Korea South Korea, officially the Republic of Korea (ROK), is a country in East Asia, constituting the southern part of the Korean Peninsula and sharing a land border with North Korea. Its western border is formed by the Yellow Sea, while its eastern border is defined by the Sea of Japan. South Korea claims to be the sole legitimate government of the entire peninsula and adjacent islands. It has a population... read more
South Korea should be ranked No. 2, with the U.S. taking number 1. The reason the U.S. being above is because of the advancement in movie making. South Koreans are one of the best storytellers in the world. India should be No. 3. There are good Bollywood gems, but with all their crappy movie animations, ridiculous fight scenes, copying, and remakes, I'm shocked India is ranked 1.
South Korea is becoming better and better in the film industry. It is very exciting to watch and also dramatic. South Korea is also voted to have the most good-looking people in Asia.
Some groundbreaking horror films from South Korea include Train to Busan, A Tale of Two Sisters, Gonjiam, The Host, The Quiet Family, and the often-overlooked Whispering Corridors film series.
Canada Canada is a country in North America that is next to the United States, and it's the 2nd largest country in the world by area (size is 9.985 million km²). This country has 10 provinces, and 3 territories. Canada became a dominion on July 1, 1867. Its 10 provinces are: Ontario, British Columbia, Quebec, Alberta, Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, New Brunswick, and Prince... read more
Canada is underrated - not as many films, but a number of key classic horror and psychological thrillers such as The Changeling, Pontypool, Ginger Snaps, Videodrome, Evil Woods, Cube, Shiver, The Dark Hour, and so on.
Denis Villeneuve: Arrival, Enemy, Prisoners... And soon the new Blade Runner and Dune. Should be higher with France, its cousin.
Canada gave us awesome directors such as David Cronenberg and James Cameron.
Albania Albania is a southeastern European country that is slightly larger than Maryland and near Montenegro, Kosovo, Republic of Macedonia, and Greece. The capital is a city called Tirana. Some other major cities in Albania are Durrës, Elbasan, Vlorë, and Shkodër. Albania gained its independence in 1912. Many different languages are spoken but the official language is Albanian. They also speak Italian,... read more
Spain Spain, or the Kingdom of Spain, is a country in southwestern Europe with parts of territory in the Atlantic Ocean and across the Mediterranean Sea. The largest part of Spain is situated on the Iberian Peninsula; its territory also includes the Canary Islands in the Atlantic Ocean, the Balearic Islands in the Mediterranean Sea, the autonomous cities of Ceuta and Melilla, and several minor overseas... read more
I'd put this country as #1. They take moviemaking very seriously and almost always refuse to produce a bad movie. Pan's Labyrinth by Guillermo del Toro is probably the best film ever made in history, along with a string of some of the best horror films such as The Devil's Backbone, The Platform, and The Orphanage. Good human drama movies like Roma, Volver, and The Motorcycle Diaries also abound.
The country that gave us Pan's Labyrinth. One of my favorite movies of all time. It's really awesome.
Denmark Denmark is a Nordic country in Northern Europe. It is the most populous and politically central constituent of the Kingdom of Denmark, a constitutionally unitary state that includes the autonomous territories of the Faroe Islands and Greenland in the North Atlantic Ocean. European Denmark is the southernmost of the Scandinavian countries, lying southwest of Sweden, south of Norway, and north of Germany... read more
All Danish movies with Mads Mikkelsen, the best Actor in the World.
Pakistan Pakistan was established in 1947 and is located in South Asia. Islamabad is the capital city of Pakistan. Karachi, Lahore and Peshawar are other major cities of Pakistan. Urdu and English are official languages of Pakistan. World's second highest peak (K-2) and ninth highest peak (Nanga Parbat) are located in Pakistan.
Pakistan once had such good movies and was taking over the pop scene too. However, due to misguided decisions in politics, it all went downhill. In recent years, Pakistan has made a comeback and is showing improvement. Although some movie trailers have not been appealing in terms of acting quality and music, I would prefer drama serials over any questionable movies until I've seen the movie to judge for myself. My support remains with the Pakistani film industry, and it's refreshing to see Pakistani movies, to be honest.
Every year, Pakistan does make at least one good movie, no judgment. We should be supporting it because the Pakistan film industry is growing, and there's a niche for making impactful movies. Although Pakistani dramas are already ahead in that regard. Pakistan makes good movies that relate to the army. Recently, movie songs have been really good too, even if the movie was not up to expectations. For example, Parey Hut Love had an amazing soundtrack.
18Bangladesh Bangladesh, officially the People's Republic of Bangladesh, is a country in South Asia. It is the eighth-most populous country in the world, with a population exceeding 163 million people in an area of either 148,460 square kilometres (57,320 sq mi) or 147,570 square kilometres (56,980 sq mi), making it one of the most densely populated countries in the world. Bangladesh shares land borders with India... read more
Bangladesh should be number one.
The Bangladeshi film industry was one of the best in the '90s. It later declined, but it has been growing rapidly since 2012.
19China China, officially the People's Republic of China, is a country in East Asia. It is the world's most populous country, with a population of more than 1.4 billion. China spans five geographical time zones and borders 14 countries, the second most of any country in the world after Russia. Covering an area of approximately 9.6 million square kilometers (3,700,000 sq mi), it is the world's third or fourth... read more
It is surprising that China is ranked #20, below many European countries. European films are mostly just uninspired copies of Hollywood films, whereas Chinese films are truly unique and different. The USA and Japan should also be at the top of the list. India should drop down to about 8.
Filmmaking at its very best. Behind Spain, it probably produces the world's best-directed films. Don't stereotype them. Martial art films are just one small genre among hundreds of others. Too many films to name, but check out by director -- Zhang Yimou's films just as a start, Jia Zhangke, Chen Kaige, Zhang Ye, and Lou Ye.
Zhang Yimou, Chen Kaige, Wong Kar Wai, Feng Xiaogang, John Woo… China has a lot of excellent directors, as well as great actors and movies.
20Philippines The Philippines, officially the Republic of the Philippines, is an archipelagic country in Southeast Asia. It is situated in the western Pacific Ocean and consists of around 7,641 islands that are broadly categorized under three main geographical divisions from north to south: Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao. The Philippines is bounded by the South China Sea to the west, the Philippine Sea to the east,... read more
Does any of you know Vice Ganda? Even though Vice Ganda is gay, she still has very good movies like Beauty and the Bestie, The Amazing Praybeyt Benjamin, and more.
The Philippines has unique movies because they are related to the culture, history, and living.
Indie films and romantic comedy films from the Philippines are really commendable! Watch and learn!
21Sweden Sweden, officially the Kingdom of Sweden, is a Scandinavian country in Northern Europe. It borders Norway to the west and Finland to the east, and is connected to Denmark in the southwest by a bridge-tunnel across the Öresund. At 450,295 square kilometers (173,860 sq mi), Sweden is the third-largest country in the European Union by area, with a total population of 10 million.
Ingmar Bergman is among the greatest directors of all time, and he is Swedish.
22Mexico Mexico, officially the United Mexican States, is a federal republic located in North America. The country is located between the U.S. and Central America, and is known for its Pacific and Gulf of Mexico beaches and its diverse landscape of mountains, deserts, and jungles.
True - Mexico has been significantly influenced by Spanish filmmakers and can claim half of Pan's Labyrinth and The Devil's Backbone. But there are so many more, such as horror classics like Tigers Are Not Afraid and Cronos, as well as some good comedies like El Infierno.
23Netherlands The Netherlands, informally Holland, is a country located in north-western Europe with overseas territories in the Caribbean. It is the largest of four constituent countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. The Netherlands consists of twelve provinces, and borders Germany to the east, Belgium to the south, with a North Sea coast-line to the north and west. It shares maritime borders with the United... read more
24Egypt Egypt, officially the Arab Republic of Egypt, is a transcontinental country spanning the northeast corner of Africa and southwest corner of Asia via a land bridge formed by the Sinai Peninsula. It is bordered by the Mediterranean Sea to the north, the Gaza Strip (Palestine) and Israel to the northeast, the Red Sea to the east, Sudan to the south, and Libya to the west. The Gulf of Aqaba in the northeast... read more
An Egyptian movie: Gods of Egypt. The cast is American, and the armies are Egyptians, really.
25Norway Norway, officially the Kingdom of Norway, is a sovereign and unitary monarchy in Northern Europe whose territory comprises the western portion of the Scandinavian Peninsula plus the island Jan Mayen and the archipelago of Svalbard. Oslo is the capital of Norway. Norwegian is the official language of Norway.
Norway makes really great movies. Plus, Norwegian women are gorgeous.
Top 10 Countries That Make the Best Movies
A total of 89 countries made submissions to the Academy for Best Foreign Language Film Oscar in 2016. So, we can safely assume that 89 countries make films (probably more). Out of the 70 awards handed out by the Academy since 1947 to foreign language films, 57 have gone to European films, 7 to Asian films, 3 to African films, and 3 to films from the Americas. Italy has won the award the most number of times –14 – followed by France, which has won it ten times. Spain and Japan are in third place; both have won it four times.
Even though Academy Award isn’t the sole barometer to judge the quality of films, it does give us a fair idea of where the best films are being made. Let me be clear here. For this article, I have not just looked at the stats of the Academy Awards to judge which country is better than the other. I think more than any awards, it is the filmmakers who are more important. With that said, here is the list of the top 10 countries that produce the best movies.
10. Denmark
To my mind, Danish films have always been known for two things – their realism and religious/sexual frankness.  The incredibly talented Danish filmmaker Carl Th. Dreyer is easily one of the greatest directors in the history of cinema. Then Denmark also has directors like Benjamin Christensen and Erik Balling, the creator of the popular Olsen-banden films. How can we forget Gabriel Axel, an Oscar-winner for ‘Babette’s Feast’ in 1987; and Bille August, the Oscar-, Palme d’Or- and Golden Globe-winner for ‘Pelle the Conqueror’ in 1988. In the modern era, Lars von Trier, who co-created the Dogme film movement, is the most recognizable name. Susanne Bier and Nicolas Winding Refn are two other names who are leaving their mark on global cinema with their magnificent works.
9. Spain
Spain has a long history of cinema, much like its more influential neighbor, France. But it first came into prominence with the rise of great filmmakers Luis Buñuel, who was the first to achieve universal recognition, followed by Pedro Almodóvar in the 1980s. Almodóvar is still very active and continues to deliver excellent films that leave cinephiles stunned. Other than him and Buñuel Spanish cinema has also seen international success over the years with films by directors like Segundo de Chomón, Florián Rey, Luis García Berlanga, Juan Antonio Bardem, Carlos Saura, Julio Médem and Alejandro Amenábar.
8. India
India has the largest film industry in the world by the number of films produced in a year. Every year it produces more than 2000 films in 20 different languages. That’s some feat. But what about the quality? That’s where Indian films fall a little behind when it comes to global acceptance. Beyond Satyajit Ray, one of the most influential filmmakers of all time, India has given us names like Mira Nair and Anurag Kashyap, but they still have to go a long way to leave their mark. One could argue that the Indian version of cinema is so different from the rest of the world that it doesn’t matter whether Western countries accept that or not. What matters is that Indian films still have the largest audience in the world!
7. Poland
Poland over the years has produced some fantastic filmmakers like Roman Polanski, Krzysztof Kieślowski, Agnieszka Holland, Andrzej Wajda, Andrzej Żuławski, Andrzej Munk, and Jerzy Skolimowski. The world is very familiar with the work of Roman Polanski, who moved to Hollywood after finding success in Poland. But it was actually Krzysztof Kieślowski who really took Polish cinema to an altogether different level. His films like ‘The Double Life of Véronique’ and the Three Colors trilogy still are considered amongst the best of cinematic art. More recently, filmmakers like Paweł Pawlikowski (whose ‘Ida’ won Best Foreign Language Film Oscar) and Andrzej Wajda have been carrying the baton of Polish cinema.
6. Japan
Japan has one of the oldest and largest film industries in the world. For those who are surprised by Japan’s inclusion so up high in the list, I want to just state one name: Akira Kurosawa. He without a shred of doubt has been one of the influential filmmakers of all time. Akira  You only have to watch films like Rashomon, Seven Samurai and Tokyo Story to know what a genius he was. But Japanese cinema is not just about Kurosawa. Other great filmmakers like Masaki Kobayashi, Kenji Mizoguchi, Yasujirō Ozu, Nagisa Oshima, Kaneto Shindo, Masahiro Shinoda, Susumu Hani, and Shohei Imamura continued carrying the legacy of Kurosawa forward. And how can you forget Hayao Miyazaki, inarguably the greatest animation filmmaker of all time? Then there’s also Takashi Miike, whose cinema may not be for everyone’s taste but he does have fans across the world.
5. Sweden
If Sweden had just produced just one filmmaker, Ingmar Bergman, it would still have found a place on this list. But then, it has produced other great movie directors like Victor Sjöström, Lasse Hallström, Roy Andersson, Bo Widerberg and Jan Troell. Swedish cinema came into prominence in the fifties with the rise of Bergman, who took the whole world of cinema by storm and is considered one of the greatest filmmakers of all time. In the 1960s, two other filmmakers — Bo Widerberg and Jan Troell – took Swedish cinema to even greater heights. Lately, Swedish directors have taken the plunge into genre filmmaking with excellent results. Films like ‘Let the Right One In’ (Låt den rätte komma in) and The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo (Män som hatar kvinnor) are proofs that Swedish cinema is still alive and kicking.
4. United Kingdom
Due to the fact that almost all the movies made in the UK are in English, it is difficult to determine whether they are produced in the UK or the US. But that doesn’t undermine the former’s contribution to cinema. The single biggest contribution of the UK has been the monumental number of actors and directors it has exported to Hollywood. Here are some filmmakers who are originally from the UK – Christopher Nolan, Ridley Scott, Danny Boyle, and Steve McQueen. On the other hand, here are some of the actors who are originally from the UK – Daniel Day-Lewis, Helen Mirren, Kate Winslet, Michael Fassbender, Christian Bale, and Carey Mulligan. Need I say more?
3. Italy
Here are some fun facts about Italian cinema. As of 2016, Italian films have won 14 Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film, the most of any country, as well as 12 Palmes d’Or, the second-most of any country. It was during the post-Word-War-II and post-Fascist era that we saw the rise of Italian cinema with directors like Luchino Visconti, Roberto Rossellini, and Vittorio De Sica coming into the picture. Then came two directors who, to this day, are considered amongst the greatest to have ever lived – Federico Fellini and Michelangelo Antonioni. At the same time, who can forget Sergio Leone, who quickly moved to Hollywood and invented a new genre altogether – Spaghetti Western. There was a dull period for Italian cinema in the 70s, but directors like Ermanno Olmi, Bernardo Bertolucci, Giuseppe Tornatore, Gabriele Salvatores, and Roberto Benigni brought Italian cinema back into the limelight. More recently, directors like Paolo Sorrentino and Nanni Moretti are carrying the legacy forward.
2. France
France is considered the birthplace of cinema for a good reason. If you turn the pages of history, France was responsible for many of the most significant contributions to the filmmaking process. Apart from the fact that France is arguably the flagbearer of cinema in its truest form, it is also the third biggest film market in the world in terms of admissions (after the United States and India). Now, let’s look at the filmmaking geniuses that France has produced. The list is very long, but I would mention a few important names who influenced – and continue influencing – filmmakers of every nationality: Jean-Luc Godard, François Truffaut, Jean Renoir, Jean-Pierre Melville, Robert Bresson. More recently, directors like Jacques Audiard, Abdellatif Kechiche, Olivier Assayas have continued carrying the great legacy of French cinema.
1. USA
Well, there’s not much to be said here. It won’t be an over-exaggeration to say that the USA is the heart of the cinematic world. Yes, it produces plenty of crap every year, but let’s not take anything away from a country that has been producing quality films every year (the numbers may vary) for the last 100 years. On top of that, it has given us a plethora of great filmmakers who continue to push boundaries for filmmakers everywhere.
