The Best Military Movies and Shows Streaming Right Now on Netflix
If you're looking for the best military and war movies and shows on Netflix, we're here to help you stop the scrolling, move past the algorithm and find what you're looking for. Netflix has a massive catalog of movies and shows, and sometimes it's hard to find exactly what you want to watch. This list can help you cut through the war movie noise and get to the good stuff.
While the movies on our list are all focused on wars from one era of human history or another, we also listed TV shows streaming on Netflix that include 
There's enough military viewing here on Netflix to last most of us a long, long time.
Docudramas can seem absurdly over the top at times, and that has a way of making important history seem goofy. Netflix’s new series about Alexander the Great has all the university professors’ talking heads you come to expect from shows such as these, but historical reenactments that don’t make you want to gag yourself with a spoon. 
It was the No. 2 TV show on Netflix after its release, which says a lot for the streamer running acclaimed series such as “Griselda” and “Formula 1: Drive to Survive.” It follows Alexander from his days as a young boy to his conquest of Darius’ Persian Empire. 
All Quiet on the Western Front
This 2022 movie is the first German-language movie version of the 1929 Erich Maria Remarque novel about the horrors of World War I. The 1930 version of the movie won an Oscar for Best Picture, and this new one was nominated for nine awards, winning four of them.
Director and screenwriter Edward Berger widened the focus of the story to include more background about WWI while maintaining the heart of the story about the brutal experiences of German soldiers in the trenches.
All the Light We Cannot See 
Based on author Anthony Doerr’s award-winning 2014 book “All the Light We Cannot See,” this new Netflix limited series stars Mark Ruffalo (“The Avengers”) as an employee at France’s Museum of Natural History and Aria Mia Loberti (who is visually impaired in real life) as his blind daughter, Marie-Laure. The two flee Nazi-occupied Paris after the fall of France and make their way to the seaside town of Saint-Malo to live with their reclusive WWI veteran uncle Etienne (Hugh Laurie, “House”).
Once there, they realize Etienne is making radio reports to aid the resistance. It’s not long before Marie-Laure starts making them, too. The young blind girl eventually forms a genuine bond with a young German soldier who is assigned to find and kill her. Louis Hofmann (“Red Sparrow”) and Lars Eidinger (“White Noise”) also star.
American Assassin
After terrorists kill his fiancée while they were on vacation in Spain, Mitch Rapp (Dylan O'Brien, “Love and Monsters”) turns his life into a mission to exact revenge and hones his body as the tool for that revenge, learning martial arts, knife throwing and marksmanship. He travels to Libya to meet the terrorist and kill him, but is interrupted by U.S. Special Forces.
Rapp is instead recruited to become an assassin in the Global War on Terror and is trained by CIA operative Stan Hurley (Micahel Keaton, “Batman”). Before long, the enemy becomes less clear. Rapp has to stop a rogue operator and former Navy SEAL (Taylor Kitsch, “Lone Survivor”) from detonating a nuclear device on the Navy’s Sixth Fleet.
The Angel
As Egypt was forming a coalition of Arab countries to launch a surprise war to retake the Sinai Peninsula from Israel, Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser's son-in-law, Ashraf Marwan, was a close aide to Nasser's successor, Anwar Sadat. What neither Nasser nor Sadat knew was that Marwan was an asset to Israel's intelligence agency, Mossad.
Obviously, this was a disaster for the Arab coalition, as was the 1973 Yom Kippur War. Netflix's "The Angel" is based on the nonfiction book "The Angel: The Egyptian Spy Who Saved Israel" and stars Marwan Kenzari ("Ben-Hur") as Marwan.
Band of Brothers
Probably the best World War II miniseries ever created (if not the best miniseries ever, period), “Band of Brothers” is based on historian Stephen E. Ambrose's 1992 nonfiction book of the same name. The series  was brought to life by Tom Hanks and Steven Spielberg with the help of real World War II veterans to make sure every small detail on screen is accurate. It even features interviews with members of the storied unit, Easy Company, 2nd Battalion, 506th Parachute Infantry Regiment of the 101st Airborne Division.
The men of Easy company, led by Dick Winters (Damian Lewis, “Homeland”) begin as green recruits training at Camp Toccoa, Georgia. They parachute into Normandy on D-Day and fight their way through Europe, in Operation Market Garden, surrounded at Bastogne during the Battle of the Bulge and find themselves capturing Hitler’s Eagle’s Nest hideaway in Berchtesgaden, Germany. It’s a must-see, and if you’re reading this, I’d be legitimately surprised if you haven’t. 
Beasts of No Nation
Idris Elba ("Thor," "The Suicide Squad") stars as a West African warlord known as The Commandant, leading a rebel battalion against government forces. As the rebels fight the falling government, The Commandant recruits Agu (Abraham Attah, "Spider-Man: Homecoming") as a child soldier.
Directed by Cary Joji Fukunaga ("No Time to Die"), "Beasts of No Nation" portrays the brutal realities of battle, combat in sub-Saharan Africa, the recruitment of child soldiers and the true human cost of war.
Blood & Gold
At the end of World War II, the remaining Nazi SS troops aren't interested in defending Germany in Netflix's latest story about the Second World War. They want gold, but the gold they're after is not only hidden, it's defended by a Wehrmacht deserter who isn't a fan of the SS. He and a local milkmaid will race the evil Nazis to find the gold and return to his long-lost daughter -- alive.
Da 5 Bloods
Director Spike Lee offers a Vietnam War-era twist on the WWII heist story of "troops who hide Nazi gold and plan to go back," with a group of Black soldiers coming across a CIA plane loaded with gold earmarked to fight the Viet Cong.
The movie takes place in the present day with the group reuniting in Ho Chi Minh City to go on a mission to locate their horde. As they head out to search for the gold, the group is haunted by memories of their commanding officer (Chadwick Boseman), who was killed in a firefight back in the day. Delroy Lindo's character's son (played by a pre-fame Jonathan Majors) is also along for the trip.
The great thing is that "Da 5 Bloods" works both as a straight-up action picture with betrayals and gunfights while also telling a story about Black veterans of the Vietnam War.
Darkest Hour
Gary Oldman won a Best Actor Oscar for his portrayal of U.K. Prime Minister Winston Churchill in this drama about the early days of World War II. Churchill got a lot of blowback from his cabinet and the opposition when he refused to make a peace deal with Adolf Hitler, and the movie effectively dramatizes that crisis.
His administration survived a disastrous loss on the battlefields of France in 1939 and won over the people with the evacuation of troops from the beaches at Dunkirk. "Darkest Hour" ends with the prime minister's legendary "We shall fight on the beaches" speech to Parliament.
The Diplomat
When a British warship explodes in the Persian Gulf, the world's eyes look toward Iran as the likely culprit. As the death toll mounts, the president of the United States sends a new ambassador to the United Kingdom, one whose specialty is more focused on trouble spots and less on the pomp of such a posting.
Keri Russell ("The Americans") stars as Ambassador Kate Wyler in Netflix's political thriller, which has already been renewed for a second season.
Extraction 2
The highly anticipated follow-up to Netflix's "Extraction" hits the steaming service on June 16. When we last left Tyler Rake (Chris Hemsworth, "Thor"), he was presumed dead. Since he's clearly not, he returns to rescue the family of a Georgian mobster. Writer Joe Russo is an alum of the Marvel Cinematic Universe along with his brother, Anthony, directing "Avenger: Infinity War" and "Avengers: Endgame," among others.
Fauda
If you don't watch shows with subtitles, you've been missing "Fauda," an Israeli series that focuses on the leader of the Israel Defense Forces' counterterrorism unit. Netflix has aired four seasons of the show, which has generated controversy for its unwillingness to offer sympathetic portrayals of people on both sides of the Israeli/Palestinian conflict.
The show's tempo is relentless, and there's plenty for fans of tactical action to enjoy over the 48 episodes (so far) of "Fauda."
First They Killed My Father
If you enjoyed director Angelina Jolie’s style in “Unbroken,” you’ll probably love this historical thriller, based on the real-world story of Cambodian author and writer Loung Ung’s memoir about growing up under Pol Pot’s Khmer Rouge regime.
Toward the end of the Vietnam War, fighting spills over into Cambodia, but the United States suddenly pulls out of Southeast Asia, giving the Khmer Rouge an advantage in the Cambodian Civil War. Young Loung Ung is just a girl, but is forced to evacuate the capital and work in the countryside. Eventually, regime soldiers kill her father for his ties to the former government, and Loung is trained as a child soldier. She soon finds herself fighting the invading Vietnamese.
Advertisement
Five Came Back
"Five Came Back" is a WWII documentary series based on the book by movie historian Mark Harris. Hollywood movie directors John Ford ("The Searchers"), William Wyler ("The Best Years of Our Lives"), John Huston ("The African Queen"), Frank Capra ("It Happened One Night") and George Stevens ("Shane") all volunteered for service and made some of the most compelling films about combat during the era.
The series is both a war documentary and a history of the movies. Most of these men put themselves in harm's way in an attempt to give a true picture of the struggles that American military personnel faced in the Pacific and European theaters of war.
The Forgotten Battle
Few European countries experienced World War II the way Holland did. This Dutch film is centered on the 1944 Battle of the Scheldt, as Canadian, Polish and British forces attempted to capture and open the Port of Antwerp as a vital source of supplies in Europe.
After the failure of Operation Market Garden, the Dutch Resistance turned up the pressure on the occupying Germans as Allied forces moved closer to the Netherlands. The Germans, in turn, cut off supplies to the Dutch people, causing a famine and widespread anguish.
Fury
Brad Pitt plays Don 'Wardaddy' Collier, commander of Fury, a Sherman tank in the U.S. Second Armored Division in World War II Europe. When the tank’s bow gunner is killed in combat, he’s replaced on the fly by an Army typist, Pfc. Norman Ellison (Logan Lerman, “Hunters”). The young soldier gets a harsh lesson in real-world combat.
Written and directed by Navy veteran David Ayer (“The Beekeeper”), “Fury” is based on the story of Staff Sgt. Lafayette G. "War Daddy" Pool, who landed at Normandy and whose tank was knocked out of the war multiple times. The film also features Michael Peña (“A Million Miles Away”), Jon Bernthal (“The Bear”) and a mustachioed Shia LaBeouf (“Transformers”).
Hacksaw Ridge
Mel Gibson’s “Hacksaw Ridge” came to be after decades of Hollywood interest in telling the story of real-life Medal of Honor recipient Desmond Doss. Doss achieved fame during World War II after becoming the only conscientious objector to receive the Medal of Honor. A strict Seventh-Day Adventist, he wouldn’t carry a weapon into combat, but served as a medic amid the fighting in the Pacific Theater. 
During the 1945 invasion of Okinawa, Doss saved the lives of an estimated 50 to 100 troops while performing his duties as an Army medic, despite being wounded four times himself. The climactic battle scenes in “Hacksaw Ridge” depict the fight on the Maeda Escarpment, along with Doss’ Medal of Honor actions.
Historical Roasts
What better way could there be to learn about historical figures than by watching Roastmaster General Jeff Ross roast them -- with help from some of your favorite comedians portraying other historical figures?
If you enjoyed the roast of Donald Trump, Charlie Sheen or Justin Bieber, you might like the roast of Abraham Lincoln, Cleopatra or Anne Frank in this definitely not-safe-for-work comedy series.
How to Become a Tyrant
Dictators use a pretty consistent playbook to rise to power and hold on to it for decades. This fascinating docuseries describes each step in that playbook, using examples of real-life dictators like Idi Amin, Saddam Hussein, Kim Jong-Il and others while telling the stories of how they ascended to authoritarian power.
"How to Become a Tyrant" uses commentary from professors, officials and journalists who covered those stories. It illustrates them, using animated retellings of the most gruesome stories from the tyrants' rule, all narrated by actor Peter Dinklage ("Game of Thrones").
I Am Vanessa Guillen
Twenty-year-old soldier Spc. Vanessa Guillen disappeared from Fort Hood, Texas, in April 2020, leaving behind her car keys, ID card, bank card and barracks key at her workplace. Two months later, her dismembered remains were discovered near the Leon River.
In the course of the investigation, it was discovered that she had told her parents she was being sexually harassed by a noncommissioned officer. Unsatisfied with the Army's investigation, Guillen's family kept the pressure on Fort Hood, which eventually prompted the Texas Rangers and even Congress to get involved. "I Am Vanessa Guillen" documents that pressure and the fallout of the botched investigation.
The Imitation Game 
The Allies didn't crack the German Enigma code during World War II by accident. This 2014 World War II movie was adapted from the 1983 biography “Alan Turing: The Enigma” by Andrew Hodges. Benedict Cumberbatch (“Doctor Strange”) stars as mathematician, computer scientist and cryptanalyst Alan Turing, who is hired by the British government to decrypt German messages sent through the Nazi’s Enigma machine. 
Through the use of a computer Turing created just to decrypt the messages, they manage only to decrypt words and bits of messages. The real tragedy comes when they learn to decrypt all Enigma messages: They can’t act on every bit of information, lest the Germans discover Enigma has been compromised. 
The King
“The King” stars Timothée Chalamet (“Dune”) as Prince Hal, who has no interest in ruling. After his father dies, he reluctantly takes on the title of King Henry V of England. Instead of continuing to war with his father’s enemies, the new king makes peace with them until he’s sent an insulting gift by the Dauphin (Crown Prince) of France (Robert Pattinson, “The Batman”). Henry sails with his army to fight the French, in a war culminating in the Battle of Agincourt. 
This historical epic draws not only from history, but also from William Shakespeare’s plays about Henry. Don’t expect a lot of historical accuracy, though. It’s a great movie with great fight scenes, but the producers of “The King” weren’t trying to make a movie that was true to Shakespeare’s plays, which isn’t a bad thing at all. 
The Liberator
In 2012, English journalist Alex Kershaw wrote "The Liberator: One World War II Soldier's 500-Day Odyssey from the Beaches of Sicily to the Gates of Dachau," the true story of American Army officer Felix Sparks. Netflix's "The Liberator" is an adult animated adaptation of Kershaw's book.
Sparks and the 157th Infantry Regiment, made up of cowboys, Native Americans and Latinos, made four amphibious landings during World War II, fighting just as the book's name says, from Sicily to Germany over the course of 500 days.
Major
In November 2008, terrorists from the Islamist group Lashkar-e-Taiba carried out a series of coordinated attacks across the Indian city of Mumbai, killing 175 and wounding 300. Toward the end of the attacks, only the Taj Mahal Palace Hotel had not been secured, and hostages were being held all over its grounds.
"Major" is the Bollywood-produced story of Maj. Sandeep Unnikrishnan, commander of the 51 Special Action Group, who led the assault to rescue those hostages. He and his team evacuated hostages and killed terrorists for 15 hours. In the end, many of his men were wounded, and Unnikrishnan would give his life to protect the civilian hostages.
The Mauritanian
There are hundreds of movies, documentaries and books about what life is like inside the U.S. prison system, but none of them detail life in the U.S. military’s prison camp at Guantanamo Bay. “The Mauritanian” is based on the memoirs of Mohamedou Ould Slahi, written while he was held there without charge between 2002 and 2016. The U.S. couldn’t prove he was a 9/11 conspirator, though he had fought for the Afghan Mujahideen as early as 1990. 
Starring Jodie Foster (“Silence of the Lambs”), Benedict Cumberbatch (“Sherlock”), Shailene Woodley (“The Descendants”) and Tahar Rahim as Slahi, the movie details how international defense attorney Nancy Hollander (Foster) got involved in Slahi’s case and how he was ultimately set free.
Medal of Honor
"Medal of Honor" should've been a long-running series for Netflix, but the streaming service made only one season with eight episodes, released in 2018. It's a great idea, telling the individual stories of Medal of Honor recipients in a compact form.
The series includes profiles of World War II heroes Sylvester Antolak (played by Joseph Cross, "Devotion"), Edward A. Carter Jr. (Aldis Hodge, "Black Adam") and Vito R. Bertoldo (Ben Schwartz, "Space Force"). We also get the Afghanistan War stories of Clint Romesha (Paul Wesley, "The Vampire Diaries") and Ty Carter (Jonny Weston, "Divergent"). We also get the Vietnam War story of Richard Etchberger (Oliver Hudson, "Nashville") and the Korean War stories of Hiroshi H. Miyamura (Derek Mio, "The Terror") and Joseph Vittori (Steven R. McQueen, "The Vampire Diaries").
Mosul
The Islamic State captured Mosul, Iraq's most populous city, in 2014 with an estimated 1,500 Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) fighters. There, the terrorists' leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, declared the ISIL caliphate. In 2016, Iraqi government forces, the Kurdish Peshmerga and a strange confederation of American, European and Iranian forces supported its liberation.
The 2019 film "Mosul" is set against the background of the 2016 operation to liberate the city, as a police SWAT team helps take down thousands of ISIL militants who are targeting the unit. Adam Bessa ("Extraction") stars as a Kurdish SWAT officer in this Arabic language film produced by the Russo brothers ("Avengers: Endgame") and based on the book "The Desperate Battle to Destroy ISIS" by Luke Mogelson.
Narcos
"Narcos" is the drug war-era series about how the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency and the Colombian military managed to finally bring down the narco empire of Pablo Escobar, Medellin's notorious cocaine kingpin.
Wagner Moura ("The Gray Man") gives a stunning performance as Escobar while Pedro Pascal ("The Unbearable Weight of Massive Talent") delivers as DEA agent Javier Peña. Honestly, I'm surprised you haven't seen this yet.
Obliterated 
Most of us have been there before: You have to go into work early in the morning, but had a little too much fun the night before. Most of us have pushed through that day somehow. The only thing is, most of us aren’t on a special operations squad. In Netflix’s “Obliterated,” an elite spec ops team spends a night celebrating after dismantling a rogue nuclear device, only to wake up in the morning and discover it was a decoy -- and the real one is still out there. 
This limited series is “The Hangover” meets “24” and comes from the comedic minds who brought us "Cobra Kai," “Hot Tub Time Machine” and the “Harold and Kumar” films.   
Operation Mincemeat
The disinformation effort to confuse Nazi Germany about where the Allies would land in France was wide-ranging, multifaceted and complex. Among the most ingenious and risky plans was depositing the body of a dead man who appeared to be carrying the secret invasion strategy in a way the Nazis would surely find it -- and make it convincing.
Actor Colin Firth ("1917") headlines a cast retelling the story of how the operation, codenamed "Mincemeat," came to be planned and carried out, despite extreme doubts about its ability to fool anyone, let alone German intelligence.
The Outpost 
This 2019 film is based on journalist Jake Tapper’s 2012 book, “The Outpost: An Untold Story of American Valor.” Tapper’s book chronicles the 2009 Battle of Kamdesh, where American troops successfully fought off a Taliban attack on Combat Outpost Keating in Afghanistan’s Nuristan Province. The battle didn’t come without losses, however. Outnumbered nearly 3-to-1, COP Keating was partially overrun during the fighting and eight Americans were killed, along with another 42 wounded. 
The movie stars Scott Eastwood (“Suicide Squad”) as Staff Sgt. Clint Romesha and Caleb Landry Jones (“X-Men: First Class”) as Spc. Ty Michael Carter, both of whom would receive the Medal of Honor for their actions during the battle. Orlando Bloom (“Pirates of the Caribbean”) has a short, but important role. 
The Pacific
This HBO miniseries is the Pacific War’s answer to “Band of Brothers,” but instead of being drawn from a historian like Stephen Ambrose, the source material for this series was written by the Marines who fought against the Japanese. Its primary sources are “With the Old Breed: At Peleliu and Okinawa” and “China Marine” by Eugene Sledge and “Helmet for My Pillow” by Robert Leckie, and the authors are featured characters in the series. It also draws from “Red Blood, Black Sand” by Chuck Tatum, to get a full story about Marine John Basilone.
“The Pacific” was also produced by Tom Hanks and Steven Spielberg, and stars James Badge Dale (“The Departed”) as Leckie, Joseph Mazzello (“Jurassic Park”) as Sledge and Rami Malek (“Mr. Robot”) as  Merriell “Snafu” Shelton.
The Patients of Dr. Garcia
Set in the aftermath of the Spanish Civil War and, later, World War II, this Netflix series follows Dr. Guillermo Garcia (Javier Rey, "The House of Snails") as he treats a spy, Manuel Arroyo (Tamar Novas, "The Sea Inside"), who is posing as a Republican diplomat. The two attempt to infiltrate a "ratline," a network of clandestine operatives helping Nazis and Fascists escape to Argentina.
Based on the book "The Patients of Dr. Garcia" by Almudena Grandes, the Netflix series is a spy thriller that leaves viewers guessing who to trust, who will survive and who -- if anyone -- ends up dead.
The Red Sea Diving Resort
In the mid-1980s, a mass migration of Ethiopians fled the widespread famine in their home country for refugee camps in Sudan. Among them were thousands of persecuted Ethiopian Jews. Israel, long known for its foreign policy of protecting persecuted Jews anywhere in the world, covertly evacuated these refugees to safety in Israel.
“The Red Sea Diving Resort” stars Chris Evans (“Captain America: The First Avenger”) and Michael K. Williams (“The Wire”), in a story based on this evacuation. To facilitate the rescue, Mossad sets up a cover business, a resort that gives evacuees access to the Red Sea.
The Siege of Jadotville
A force of 155 Irish soldiers was serving with the United Nations Operation in the Congo during a civil uprising in 1961. Rather than limit their attacks to the government forces, Congolese rebels from the breakaway State of Katanga attacked the Irish troops in a mining town known as Jadotville.
The Irishmen had to hold off a force of thousands of rebel troops while they waited to be rescued by Irish, Indian and Swedish troops from the U.N. mission. An Irish Army veteran, Declan Power, wrote the 2005 book, "The Siege at Jadotville: The Irish Army's Forgotten Battle" on which the movie is based.
The Spy
Sacha Baron Cohen stars as real-life Mossad agent Eli Cohen, who worked undercover in Syria with the secret identity of Kamel Amin Thaabet and worked his way up to become the Arab country's deputy defense minister in the years leading to the 1967 Six-Day War.
If you've seen Cohen only in comic roles like Borat, Ali G or Brüno, you may well be surprised at how good he is in this dramatic role. The series is in English, so those allergic to subtitles have nothing to worry about.
Spy Ops 
If espionage thrillers are your favorite kind of movie or TV show, it won’t get more thrilling than Netflix’s new documentary series “Spy Ops.” Real-world CIA and M16 operatives who served from the Cold War to the War on Terror share stories from seven real covert operations and a plot to kill Pope John Paul II. 
These covert ops include Jawbreaker, the CIA’s 2002 effort in Afghanistan; Pimlico, the CIA’s rescue of a KGB informant; Wrath of God, the Mossad effort to hunt and kill the perpetrators of the 1972 Munich Massacre; and the overthrow of Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega. You might already know the outcome, but operations are thrilling all the same. 
Thank You for Your Service
Miles Teller leads the cast of “Thank You for Your Service,” based on the book of the same name. Washington Post reporter David Finkel wrote “Thank You for Your Service” about the return of the U.S. Army’s 2nd Battalion, 16th Infantry Regiment, which returned to Fort Riley, Kansas, in 2007 after a 15-month deployment to Iraq. 
After their return, the men of the 16th Infantry Regiment begin to suffer from the signature unseen wounds of Global War on Terror, including post-traumatic stress disorder and suicide. The movie depicts veterans’ issues with the Department of Veterans Affairs that were pervasive at the time -- some of which still linger today.
Traitors
At the end of World War II, the United States and the Soviet Union were global superpowers in what seemed like a new world order. But there were some paradigms that survived the radical changes of the global conflict, among the most notable of which was the influence and growth of global communism. Indeed, the war had done nothing to change the USSR’s desire to infiltrate governments around the world. This world is the background to Netflix’s “Traitors,” where the U.S. government hires a British civil servant (Emma Appleton) to spy on her co-workers, looking for potential Russian spies. 
Treason
When the limited series "Treason" premiered on Netflix just after Christmas 2022, it proved an immediate success around the world. Charlie Cox, best known for playing Daredevil in Marvel movies and shows, stars as Adam Lawrence, a British agent who's elevated to the top job at MI6 when his boss is poisoned.
He learns that an ex-lover is actually a Russian operative who's been pulling strings to advance his career. He's also being investigated by the British government and the CIA, who both have questions about his loyalty.
Triple Frontier
"Triple Frontier" is a heist movie, featuring an all-star cast including Oscar Isaac's ("The Last Jedi") Santiago Garcia, who recruits his fellow ex-Delta Force soldiers played by Ben Affleck ("Justice League"), Charlie Hunnam ("Sons of Anarchy"), Garrett Hedlund ("Mudbound") and Pedro Pascal ("The Mandalorian") to steal millions in cash from a Colombian drug lord.
They find far more money than they had planned for, and the excessive cash becomes troublesome as the crew attempts to escape from the jungles of South America.
Unbroken
Director and producer Angelina Jolie made headlines in 2014 with this autobiographical depiction of Louis "Louie" Zamperini. The movie sparked controversy in Japan before it was even released, based on Zamperini’s assertion of war crimes he witnessed as a prisoner of war. 
Zamperini was an Olympic athlete before World War II, competing in the Summer Olympics in Berlin. He was shot down over the Pacific Ocean while flying in a B-24 Liberator bomber as a member of the U.S. Army Air Forces in 1943. Captured by the Japanese, he endured life (and near death) in a prison camp until the end of the war.
War Machine
Brad Pitt ("Inglourious Basterds") stars as four-star Gen. Glen McMahon in this satirical comedy based on the nonfiction book "The Operators: The Wild and Terrifying Inside Story of America's War in Afghanistan" by Michael Hastings. McMahon, a character based on the real Gen. Stanley McChrystal, is tasked with winding down the war in Afghanistan any way he sees fit.
But McMahon believes the war can be won, and does the one thing he was absolutely not supposed to do: Ask for more troops.
World War II: From the Frontlines
We’ve all probably seen dozens of World War II documentaries, and by now, there’s one from nearly every point of view. What’s really unique about Netflix’s “From the Frontlines” is that the talking heads aren’t professors or people who read history books; they are the voices of people who were there. This series describes what it was like to be a German civilian at the firebombing of Dresden, a Londoner during the Blitz or a sailor aboard a ship struck by a kamikaze. This all-encompassing documentary uses archival footage and archival voices to bring new life and poignancy to the war’s most critical moments. 
The Woman King
"The Woman King" is based on the true story of the Agojie, an all-female group of warriors who liberated women sold into slavery in the African country of Dahomey in 1823. Viola Davis gives an unforgettable performance as Gen. Nanisca, the leader of the warriors who will eventually be crowned king of her people.
This 2022 film should appeal to anyone who enjoys epic historical war movies like "Gladiator" or "Braveheart." The combat scenes are impeccable, and Nanisca is an unforgettable character who has earned her place as one of the great movie military leaders.
Keep Up With the Best in Military Entertainment
Whether you're looking for news and entertainment, thinking of joining the military or keeping up with military life and benefits, Military.com has you covered. Subscribe to the Military.com newsletter to have military news, updates and resources delivered straight to your inbox..
Related Topics: Under the Radar - Entertainment News Movies Television World War II Vietnam War Entertainment World War I
James Barber
James Barber is the former entertainment editor for Military.com. He has a background in the music, radio and film industries and goes behind the scenes to bring the military and veteran audience entertainment news they care about. Read Full Bio
Blake Stilwell
Blake Stilwell is a former Air Force combat photographer with degrees and experience in Graphic Design, Television and Film, International Relations, Public Relations and Middle Eastern Affairs. Instead of using any of that, he (eventually) became a writer. His work has appeared in Recoil Magazine, Military Times, Coffee or Die, Skillset Magazine, and more. Blake is based in Ohio but is often found elsewhere. Read Full Bio
