100 WORST MOVIES OF ALL TIME
It’s bad movies galore as we encounter the Rottenest of the Rotten: 100 movies that scored less than 6% (from at least 20 reviews) with the critics on the Tomatometer!
You’re going to see lots of 0% movies, and there’s even more out there, but the ones on this list all have at least 20 reviews. We wanted to make sure the movies we’re “vouching” for as the worst ever have inflicted a minimum threshold of agony on critics. And the 20-review entry applies for every other movie on this list, and that includes the usual suspects of garbage cinema, like the deep space train wreck Battlefield Earth, the box office turkey (turtle?) The Master of Disguise, Netflix’s lazy western The Ridiculous 6, and flaccid softcore Killing Me Softly (which also makes a dubious appearance in the 200 best and worst erotic movies).
You may also note a number of significant stinkers are from the past 20 years. It’s not just because Uwe Boll was employed during this time period. And, by the way, he’s actually beat by dubious directing duo Aaron Seltzer and Jason Friedberg, who have four movies on the list. Instead, it’s the fact more reviews are being written and collected than ever before, so today’s disasters have a better chance of vaunting over 20 reviews. (And for movies that share the same score, more reviews means you’re placed higher within the ranking.)
But fret not: Plenty of yesteryear’s bombs are here. After all, the decade that produced Mac & Me has a lot to account for. Some of the classic trash featured includes the soul-sucking Mortal Kombat: Annihilation, Speed 2: Cruise Control (see what happens when you throw Keanu overboard?), off-the-deep-end Jaws: The Revenge, and prime directive-violating RoboCop 3.
What you won’t see: Some legendary bad movies like Cats, Birdemic, and The Room, all of which have cleared at least a 10% Tomatometer. That’s right, they were too good. And Miami Connection and Plan 9 From Outer Space are actually Fresh!
Most recently, Winnie-the-Pooh: Blood and Honey has squeezed in, the first movie to appear since 2020’s The Last Days of American Crime. Then we added the Alison Brie/John Cena joint Freelance.
Now that we set the mood for truly bad movies, start the most painful watchlist you’ll ever make with the 100 worst movies of all time! —Alex Vo
BALLISTIC: ECKS VS. SEVER (2002)
Critics Consensus: A startlingly inept film, Ballistic: Ecks vs. Sever offers overblown, wall-to-wall action without a hint of wit, coherence, style, or originality.
Synopsis: Haunted by the mysterious death of his wife, Jeremiah Ecks (Antonio Banderas) has become a recluse, but the former FBI... [More]
Starring: Antonio Banderas, Lucy Liu, Gregg Henry, Ray Park
Directed By: Wych Kaosayananda
ONE MISSED CALL (2008)
Critics Consensus: One of the weakest entries in the J-horror remake sweepstakes, One Missed Call is undone by bland performances and shopworn shocks.
Synopsis: When Beth Raymond (Shannyn Sossamon) witnesses the deaths of two friends, she knows there is more at work than just... [More]
Starring: Shannyn Sossamon, Edward Burns, Ana Claudia Talancón, Ray Wise
Directed By: Éric Valette
LEFT BEHIND (2014)
Critics Consensus: Yea verily, like unto a plague of locusts, Left Behind hath begat a further scourge of devastation upon Nicolas Cage's once-proud filmography.
Synopsis: The entire planet is thrown into mayhem when millions of people disappear without a trace -- all that remains are... [More]
Starring: Nicolas Cage, Chad Michael Murray, Cassi Thomson, Nicky Whelan
Directed By: Vic Armstrong
A THOUSAND WORDS (2012)
Critics Consensus: Dated jokes (A Thousand Words was shot in 2008) and removing Eddie Murphy's voice -- his greatest comedic asset -- dooms this painful mess from the start.
Synopsis: Jack McCall (Eddie Murphy) is a selfish literary agent whose fast-talking ways allow him to close any deal. His next... [More]
Starring: Eddie Murphy, Kerry Washington, Cliff Curtis, Clark Duke
Directed By: Brian Robbins
GOTTI (2018)
Critics Consensus: Fuhgeddaboudit.
Synopsis: Raised on the streets of New York, young John Gotti found his way into the Gambino crime family, eventually having... [More]
Starring: John Travolta, Spencer Rocco Lofranco, Pruitt Taylor Vince, Stacy Keach
Directed By: Kevin Connolly
PINOCCHIO (2002)
Critics Consensus: Roberto Benigni misfires wildly with this adaptation of Pinocchio, and the result is an unfunny, poorly-made, creepy vanity project.
Synopsis: A woodcarver creates a puppet (Roberto Benigni) that longs to become a real boy.... [More]
Starring: Roberto Benigni, Nicoletta Braschi, Mino Bellei, Carlo Guiffrè
Directed By: Roberto Benigni
SUPERBABIES: BABY GENIUSES 2 (2004)
Critics Consensus: A startling lack of taste pervades Superbabies, a sequel offering further proof that bad jokes still aren't funny when coming from the mouths of babes.
Synopsis: Toddlers use their special abilities to stop a media mogul (Jon Voight) from altering the minds of children.... [More]
Starring: Jon Voight, Scott Baio, Vanessa Angel, Peter Wingfield
Directed By: Bob Clark
GOLD DIGGERS (2003)
Critics Consensus: It aspires to Farrelly-level offensiveness, but the PG-13 rating and a dearth of decent gags renders Gold Diggers tame, toothless, and dull.
Synopsis: Calvin (Will Friedle) and Leonard (Chris Owen), two broke losers, are arrested for trying to rob rich old sisters Doris... [More]
Starring: Will Friedle, Chris Owen, Louise Lasser, Renee Taylor
Directed By: Gary Preisler
THE LAST DAYS OF AMERICAN CRIME (2020)
Critics Consensus: This Crime is punishment.
Synopsis: Two men and a woman plan the heist of the century before a government-broadcast signal wipes out crime forever.... [More]
Starring: Edgar Ramírez, Michael Pitt, Anna Brewster, Sharlto Copley
Directed By: Olivier Megaton
JAWS THE REVENGE (1987)
Critics Consensus: Illogical, tension-free, and filled with cut-rate special effects, Jaws: The Revenge is a sorry chapter in a once-proud franchise.
Synopsis: The family of widow Ellen Brody (Lorraine Gary) has long been plagued by shark attacks, and this unfortunate association continues... [More]
Starring: Lorraine Gary, Lance Guest, Mario Van Peebles, Karen Young
Directed By: Joseph Sargent
THE RIDICULOUS 6 (2015)
Critics Consensus: Every bit as lazily offensive as its cast and concept would suggest, The Ridiculous Six is standard couch fare for Adam Sandler fanatics and must-avoid viewing for film enthusiasts of every other persuasion.
Synopsis: White Knife, an orphan raised by Native Americans, discovers that five outlaws are actually his half-brothers. Together, they set out... [More]
Starring: Adam Sandler, Will Forte, Taylor Lautner, Steve Buscemi
Directed By: Frank Coraci
DARK CRIMES (2016)
Critics Consensus: Dark Crimes is a rote, unpleasant thriller that fails to parlay its compelling true story and a committed Jim Carrey performance into even modest chills.
Synopsis: A hard-boiled detective becomes suspicious of an author when the incidents described in his hit novel resemble the inner-workings of... [More]
Starring: Jim Carrey, Charlotte Gainsbourg, Marton Csokas, Kati Outinen
Directed By: Alexandros Avranas
STRATTON (2017)
Critics Consensus: Stratton's action-thriller ambitions are roundly thwarted by a derivative story, misguided casting, and a low-budget feel underscored by unimpressive set pieces.
Synopsis: After the death of his American counterpart, an MI6 agent and his team must race against time to stop a... [More]
Starring: Dominic Cooper, Connie Nielsen, Gemma Chan, Tyler Hoechlin
Directed By: Simon West
LONDON FIELDS (2018)
Critics Consensus: London Fields bungles its beloved source material and an intriguingly eclectic cast, leaving audiences with a would-be neo-noir of interest only to the morbidly curious.
Synopsis: Clairvoyant femme fatale Nicola Six has been living with a dark premonition of her impending death by murder. She begins... [More]
Starring: Amber Heard, Billy Bob Thornton, Theo James, Jim Sturgess
Directed By: Mathew Cullen
THE NUTCRACKER (2010)
Critics Consensus: No consensus yet.
Synopsis: Christmas in Vienna is a dull affair for 9-year-old Mary (Elle Fanning), until her beloved Uncle Albert (Nathan Lane) arrives... [More]
Starring: Elle Fanning, Nathan Lane, John Turturro, Frances de la Tour
Directed By: Andrey Konchalovskiy
RETURN TO THE BLUE LAGOON (1991)
Critics Consensus: Despite its lush tropical scenery and attractive leads, Return to the Blue Lagoon is as ridiculous as its predecessor, and lacks the prurience and unintentional laughs that might make it a guilty pleasure.
Synopsis: When widow Sarah Hargrave (Lisa Pelikan) washes ashore on a tropical island with her daughter and adopted son, she learns... [More]
Starring: Milla Jovovich, Brian Krause, Lisa Pelikan, Courtney Phillips
Directed By: William Graham
WAGONS EAST! (1994)
Critics Consensus: Wagons East! is a witless, toothless satire of Westerns that falls far below the standard set by Blazing Saddles, and is notable only for being John Candy's final screen performance.
Synopsis: When a group of dissatisfied settlers decides they've had enough of the Wild West, they hire James Harlow (John Candy),... [More]
Starring: John Candy, Richard Lewis, John C. McGinley, Ellen Greene
Directed By: Peter Markle
PROBLEM CHILD (1990)
Critics Consensus: Mean-spirited and hopelessly short on comic invention, Problem Child is a particularly unpleasant comedy, one that's loaded with manic scenery chewing and juvenile pranks.
Synopsis: Ben (John Ritter) is a good-hearted guy who's always wanted a son of his own, but so far he and... [More]
Starring: John Ritter, Michael Oliver, Jack Warden, Gilbert Gottfried
Directed By: Dennis Dugan
CABIN FEVER (2016)
Critics Consensus: No need for a quarantine -- enthusiasm for this inert remake is not contagious.
Synopsis: Fresh out of college, five friends (Nadine Crocker, Matthew Daddario, Samuel Davis) face the horrors of a flesh-eating virus while... [More]
Starring: Nadine Crocker, Matthew Daddario, Samuel Davis, Gage Golightly
Directed By: Travis Zariwny
3 STRIKES (2000)
Critics Consensus: 3 Strikes lacks direction and its low-brow humor isn't even that funny.
Synopsis: Rob Douglas (Brian Hooks) is just released from jail. The state adopts a "3 strikes" rule for felons that involves... [More]
Starring: Brian Hooks, N'Bushe Wright, Faizon Love, E-40
Directed By: DJ Pooh
THE DISAPPOINTMENTS ROOM (2016)
Critics Consensus: The Disappointments Room lives down to its title with a thrill-free thriller that presumably left its stars filled with regret - and threatens to do the same for audiences.
Synopsis: Dana (Kate Beckinsale), her husband David and their 5-year-old son Lucas start a new life after moving from the hustle... [More]
Starring: Kate Beckinsale, Mel Raido, Duncan Joiner, Lucas Till
Directed By: D.J. Caruso
REDLINE (2007)
Critics Consensus: Redline has plenty of bad acting, laughable dialogue, and luxury cars.
Synopsis: Beautiful auto mechanic and aspiring singer Natasha gets a gig illegally racing flashy sports cars for wealthy music producer Infamous,... [More]
Starring: Nathan Phillips, Nadia Bjorlin, Angus Macfadyen, Eddie Griffin
Directed By: Andy Cheng
STAYING ALIVE (1983)
Critics Consensus: This sequel to Saturday Night Fever is shockingly embarrassing and unnecessary, trading the original's dramatic depth for a series of uninspired dance sequences.
Synopsis: Six years after his glittering triumph in the disco dance contest of "Saturday Night Fever," an older and wiser Tony... [More]
Starring: John Travolta, Cynthia Rhodes, Finola Hughes, Steve Inwood
Directed By: Sylvester Stallone
LOOK WHO'S TALKING NOW (1993)
Critics Consensus: Look Who's Talking Now: Look away.
Synopsis: James (John Travolta) and Mollie Ubriacco (Kirstie Alley) are expanding the family again, this time with Rocks the mutt (Danny... [More]
Starring: John Travolta, Kirstie Alley, David Gallagher, Tabitha Lupien
Directed By: Tom Ropelewski
HIGHLANDER II: THE QUICKENING (1991)
Critics Consensus: There should have been only one.
Synopsis: In this sci-fi/fantasy sequel, Connor MacLeod (Christopher Lambert) has become an elderly man after losing his immortality. Living in a... [More]
Starring: Christopher Lambert, Sean Connery, Virginia Madsen, Michael Ironside
Directed By: Russell Mulcahy
HOMECOMING (2009) 
Critics Consensus: A lazy collection of obsession thriller clichés, Homecoming will leave viewers wishing they'd opted for a lopsided football game and some awkward dancing instead.
Synopsis: A jealous woman (Mischa Barton) plots revenge after her former beau (Matt Long) returns to their hometown with a pretty... [More]
Starring: Mischa Barton, Matt Long, Jessica Stroup, Michael Landes
Directed By: Morgan J. Freeman
BOLERO (1984)
Critics Consensus: Bolero combines a ludicrous storyline and wildly mismatched cast in its desperate attempts to titillate, but only succeeds in arousing boredom.
Synopsis: A 1920s English heiress (Bo Derek) seeks ecstasy with a sheik in Morocco and a bullfighter (Andrea Occhipinti) in Spain.... [More]
Starring: Bo Derek, George Kennedy, Andrea Occhipinti, Ana García Obregón
Directed By: John Derek
PRECIOUS CARGO (2016)
Critics Consensus: No consensus yet.
Synopsis: To get back in the good graces of her murderous boss (Bruce Willis), a seductive thief (Claire Forlani) recruits an... [More]
Starring: Mark-Paul Gosselaar, Bruce Willis, Claire Forlani, Daniel Bernhardt
Directed By: Max Adams
MAX STEEL (2016)
Critics Consensus: Bereft of characterization or even satisfying rock 'em sock 'em, Max Steel feels like futzing with an action figure without any childhood imagination.
Synopsis: Teenager Max McGrath (Ben Winchell) discovers that his body can generate the most powerful energy in the universe. Steel (Josh... [More]
Starring: Ben Winchell, Maria Bello, Ana Villafañe, Josh Brener
Directed By: Stewart Hendler
KILLING ME SOFTLY (2002)
Critics Consensus: Respected director Chen Kaige's first English-language film is a spectacularly misguided erotic thriller, with ludicrous plot twists and cringe-worthy dialogue.
Synopsis: A woman (Heather Graham) grows suspicious of her controlling husband (Joseph Fiennes) after she discovers secrets about the women in... [More]
Starring: Heather Graham, Joseph Fiennes, Natascha McElhone, Ulrich Thomsen
Directed By: Chen Kaige
MERCI DOCTEUR REY (2002)
Critics Consensus: This overly wacky farce strains for sophistication but lacks polish and a coherent narrative.
Synopsis: A gay man (Stanislas Merhar) tells a woman (Jane Birkin) impersonating a psychiatrist that he witnessed a murder.... [More]
Starring: Dianne Wiest, Jane Birkin, Stanislas Merhar, Bulle Ogier
Directed By: Andrew Litvack
TRANSYLMANIA (2009)
Critics Consensus: Never aiming higher than threadbare jokes and offensive attempts at politically incorrect humor, Transylmania is a vampire comedy that truly sucks.
Synopsis: College students arrive at a Romanian castle for a semester abroad, unaware that the place is infested with vampires.... [More]
Starring: Patrick Cavanaugh, James DeBello, Tony Denman, Paul H. Kim
Directed By: David Hillenbrand, Scott Hillenbrand
FREELANCE (2023)
Critics Consensus: Much like a real-life Freelance gig, this sodden action comedy offers no benefits.
Synopsis: Ex-special forces operative Mason Pettis (John Cena) is stuck in a dead-end desk job when he reluctantly takes on a... [More]
Starring: John Cena, Alison Brie, Juan Pablo Raba, Christian Slater
Directed By: Pierre Morel
STOLEN (2009)
Critics Consensus: With plot points Stolen from countless superior films, this would-be thriller squanders a solid cast on overly serious and suspense-free storytelling.
Synopsis: A detective (Jon Hamm) becomes obsessed with solving a child's 50-year-old murder, uncovering striking similarities between the case and his... [More]
Starring: Jon Hamm, Josh Lucas, Rhona Mitra, Jimmy Bennett
Directed By: Anders Anderson
DARK TIDE (2012)
Critics Consensus: Shallow and brackish, Dark Tide fails to rise.
Synopsis: A traumatized shark expert (Halle Berry) must battle her own fears to lead a thrill-seeking businessman on a dive into... [More]
Starring: Halle Berry, Olivier Martinez, Ralph Brown, Luke Tyler
Directed By: John Stockwell
FOLKS! (1992)
Critics Consensus: Don't watch this alleged comedy looking for more than pained performances in support of ill-advised ageist jokes, because that's all Folks! has to offer.
Synopsis: When Jon (Tom Selleck), a well-heeled professional, visits his mother, Mildred (Anne Jackson), in the hospital, he's unaware of how... [More]
Starring: Tom Selleck, Don Ameche, Anne Jackson, Christine Ebersole
Directed By: Ted Kotcheff
SIMON SEZ (1999)
Critics Consensus: Simon Sez no matter how starved you are for something to watch, there has to be a better option than this dreadfully misguided action thriller.
Synopsis: Interpol agent Simon (Dennis Rodman) is gathering information about the weapons trade on the French Riviera and trying to pinpoint... [More]
Starring: Dennis Rodman, Dane Cook, Natalia Cigliuti, Filip Nikolic
Directed By: Kevin Alyn Elders
ALONE IN THE DARK (2005)
Critics Consensus: Inept on almost every level, Alone in the Dark may not work as a thriller, but it's good for some head-slapping, incredulous laughter.
Synopsis: When the investigations of supernatural detective Edward Carnby (Christian Slater) lead him to uncover a long-lost tribe called the Abskani,... [More]
Starring: Christian Slater, Tara Reid, Stephen Dorff, Frank C. Turner
Directed By: Uwe Boll
THE MASTER OF DISGUISE (2002)
Critics Consensus: An ill-concieved attempt to utilize Dana Carvey's talent for mimicry, The Master of Disguise is an irritating, witless farce weighted down by sophomoric gags.
Synopsis: Pistachio Disguisey (Dana Carvey), a genial waiter at his father Frabbrizio's (James Brolin) Italian restaurant, possesses an uncanny knack for... [More]
Starring: Dana Carvey, Jennifer Esposito, Harold Gould, James Brolin
Directed By: Perry Andelin Blake
DADDY DAY CAMP (2007)
Critics Consensus: A mirthless, fairly desperate family film, Daddy Day Camp relies too heavily on bodily functions for comedic effect, resulting in plenty of cheap gags but no laughs.
Synopsis: Spurred on by their wives' insistence that their children attend summer camp, daycare entrepreneurs Charlie Hinton (Cuba Gooding Jr.) and... [More]
Starring: Cuba Gooding Jr., Lochlyn Munro, Paul Rae, Richard Gant
Directed By: Fred Savage
DISASTER MOVIE (2008)
Critics Consensus: Returning to their seemingly bottomless well of flatulence humor, racial stereotypes, and stale pop culture gags, Jason Friedberg and Aaron Seltzer have produced what is arguably their worst Movie yet.
Synopsis: During a fateful night, a group of impossibly attractive 20-somethings (Matt Lanter, Vanessa Minnillo, Kim Kardashian) must dodge a series... [More]
Starring: Matt Lanter, Vanessa Lachey, Kim Kardashian West, Carmen Electra
Directed By: Jason Friedberg, Aaron Seltzer
TWISTED (2004)
Critics Consensus: An implausible, overheated potboiler that squanders a stellar cast, Tisted is a clichéd, risible whodunit.
Synopsis: Recently promoted and transferred to the homicide division, Inspector Jessica Shepard (Ashley Judd) feels pressure to prove herself -- and... [More]
Starring: Ashley Judd, Samuel L. Jackson, Andy Garcia, David Strathairn
Directed By: Philip Kaufman
EPIC MOVIE (2007)
Critics Consensus: A crude comedy with nothing new or insightful to say about the subjects it satirizes.
Synopsis: Four adult orphans (Kal Penn, Adam Campbell, Faune Chambers, Jayma Mays) have an incredible adventure in a spoof of blockbuster... [More]
Starring: Kal Penn, Adam Campbell, Faune Chambers Watkins, Jayma Mays
Directed By: Jason Friedberg, Aaron Seltzer
CROSSOVER (2006)
Critics Consensus: This heartfelt but incompetent, cliche-ridden sports picture is the cinematic equivalent of an airball.
Synopsis: The lives of a gifted athlete (Wesley Jonathan) and his best friend (Anthony Mackie) change when they take a fateful... [More]
Starring: Wesley Jonathan, Anthony Mackie, Wayne Brady, Kristen Wilson
Directed By: Preston A. Whitmore II
THE IN CROWD (2000)
Critics Consensus: A dull, soapy potboiler that lacks the energy to qualify as a guilty pleasure, The In Crowd is undone by slow pacing, poor acting, and a stunning lack of originality.
Synopsis: Adrien Williams has spent time at a psychiatric hospital, learning to come to terms with a troubled past and is... [More]
Starring: Lori Heuring, Susan Ward, Daniel Hugh Kelly, Matthew Settle
Directed By: Mary Lambert
ONE FOR THE MONEY (2012)
Critics Consensus: Dull and unfunny, One For the Money wastes Katherine Heigl's talents on a stunningly generic comic thriller.
Synopsis: New Jersey native Stephanie Plum (Katherine Heigl) has plenty of attitude, even if she is broke after six months of... [More]
Starring: Katherine Heigl, Jason O'Mara, Daniel Sunjata, John Leguizamo
Directed By: Julie Anne Robinson
TEXAS RANGERS (2001)
Critics Consensus: As far as westerns go, Texas Rangers is strictly mediocre stuff.
Synopsis: Texas, 1875. In a land without justice, where chaos reigns, one legendary man, Leander McNelly (Dylan McDermott), is chosen to... [More]
Starring: James Van Der Beek, Dylan McDermott, Usher, Ashton Kutcher
Directed By: Steve Miner
MEET THE SPARTANS (2008)
Critics Consensus: A tired, unfunny, offensive waste of time, Meet the Spartans scrapes the bottom of the cinematic barrel.
Synopsis: When Xerxes (Ken Davitian), the evil god king of Persia, sends his massive army to Sparta, King Leonidas (Sean Maguire)... [More]
Starring: Sean Maguire, Carmen Electra, Ken Davitian, Kevin Sorbo
Directed By: Jason Friedberg, Aaron Seltzer
KING'S RANSOM (2005)
Critics Consensus: Filled with crass dialogue, unlikable characters, and overdone slapstick gags, King's Ransom is an utterly inept would-be comedy.
Synopsis: When the rich and arrogant Malcolm King (Anthony Anderson) informs his wife, Renee (Kellita Smith), that he plans to divorce... [More]
Starring: Anthony Anderson, Jay Mohr, Kellita Smith, Nicole Ari Parker
Directed By: Jeff Byrd
STRANGE WILDERNESS (2008)
Critics Consensus: Strange Wilderness is a laugh-free comedy that's both aimless and overly crass.
Synopsis: Peter Gaulke takes over, when his father, a respected wildlife TV host dies, but receives far less success. When the... [More]
Starring: Steve Zahn, Allen Covert, Jonah Hill, Ashley Scott
Directed By: Fred Wolf
BABY GENIUSES (1999)
Critics Consensus: Flat direction and actors who look embarrassed to be onscreen make Baby Geniuses worse than the premise suggests.
Synopsis: Evil partners (Kathleen Turner, Christopher Lloyd) experiment on an infant and send his twin to a reputable research nursery.... [More]
Starring: Kathleen Turner, Christopher Lloyd, Kim Cattrall, Peter MacNicol
Directed By: Bob Clark
KICKIN' IT OLD SKOOL (2007)
Critics Consensus: Kickin' It Old Skool is one big unfunny pop culture reference that doesn't feature many laughs.
Synopsis: At a talent show in 1986, young Justin Schumacher suffers a head injury and slips into a coma. Twenty years... [More]
Starring: Jamie Kennedy, Miguel A. Núñez Jr., Maria Menounos, Michael Rosenbaum
Directed By: Harvey Glazer
NINA (2016)
Critics Consensus: A wholly misguided tribute to its subject's searing talent and enduring impact, Nina is the cinematic equivalent of a covers project featuring all the wrong artists.
Synopsis: Manager Clifton Henderson (David Oyelowo) helps singer and pianist Nina Simone (Zoe Saldana) rediscover her love for music.... [More]
Starring: Zoe Saldana, David Oyelowo, Ronald Guttman, Keith David
Directed By: Cynthia Mort
THE HAUNTING OF MOLLY HARTLEY (2008)
Critics Consensus: The Haunting of Molly Hartley is a rather lifeless horror endeavor, with a pedestrian plot and few scares.
Synopsis: After surviving a brutal attack by her insane mother, teenage Molly (Haley Bennett) is eager to get a fresh start... [More]
Starring: Haley Bennett, Chace Crawford, Jake Weber, AnnaLynne McCord
Directed By: Mickey Liddel
BATTLEFIELD EARTH (2000)
Critics Consensus: Ugly, campy, and poorly acted, Battlefield Earth is a stunningly misguided, aggressively bad sci-fi folly.
Synopsis: In the year 3000, there are no countries, no cities... Earth is a wasteland. And man is an endangered species.... [More]
Starring: John Travolta, Barry Pepper, Forest Whitaker, Kim Coates
Directed By: Roger Christian
ROLLERBALL (2002)
Critics Consensus: Removing the social critique of the original, this updated version of Rollerball is violent, confusing, and choppy. Klein makes for a bland hero.
Synopsis: Jonathan (Chris Klein) is the most popular player in the fastest and most extreme sport of all time: rollerball. Along... [More]
Starring: Chris Klein, Jean Reno, LL Cool J, Rebecca Romijn
Directed By: John McTiernan
JACK AND JILL (2011)
Critics Consensus: Although it features an inexplicably committed performance from Al Pacino, Jack and Jill is impossible to recommend on any level whatsoever.
Synopsis: Thanksgiving is usually a happy time, but ad executive Jack (Adam Sandler) dreads the holiday because his twin sister, Jill... [More]
Starring: Adam Sandler, Katie Holmes, Al Pacino, Allen Covert
Directed By: Dennis Dugan
BLESS THE CHILD (2000)
Critics Consensus: Bless the Child squanders its talented cast on a plot that's more likely to inspire unintentional laughs than shivers.
Synopsis: When Maggie's sister Jenna saddles her with an autistic newborn named Cody she touches Maggie's heart and becomes the daughter... [More]
Starring: Kim Basinger, Jimmy Smits, Holliston Coleman, Rufus Sewell
Directed By: Chuck Russell
GETAWAY (2013)
Critics Consensus: Monotonously fast-paced to the point of exhaustion, Getaway offers a reminder of the dangers in attempting to speed past coherent editing, character development, sensible dialogue, and an interesting plot.
Synopsis: Though he used to race cars for a living, Brent Magna (Ethan Hawke) is now pitted against the clock in... [More]
Starring: Ethan Hawke, Selena Gomez, Jon Voight, Rebecca Budig
Directed By: Courtney Solomon
FEARDOTCOM (2002)
Critics Consensus: As frustrating as a 404 error, Fear Dot Com is a stylish, incoherent, and often nasty mess with few scares.
Synopsis: When four bodies are discovered among the industrial decay and urban grime of New York City, brash young detective Mike... [More]
Starring: Stephen Dorff, Natascha McElhone, Stephen Rea, Udo Kier
Directed By: William Malone
HALF PAST DEAD (2002)
Critics Consensus: Seagal is now too bulky to make a convincing action hero, and Half Past Dead is too silly and incoherent to deliver any visceral kicks.
Synopsis: Criminal mastermind Donny/49er One (Morris Chestnut) has set in motion a plan to infiltrate a high-tech prison in order to... [More]
Starring: Steven Seagal, Morris Chestnut, Ja Rule, Nia Peeples
Directed By: Don Michael Paul
THE ROOMMATE (2011)
Critics Consensus: Devoid of chills, thrills, or even cheap titillation, The Roommate isn't even bad enough to be good.
Synopsis: When Sara (Minka Kelly), a young design student from Iowa, arrives for college in Los Angeles, she is eager to... [More]
Starring: Leighton Meester, Minka Kelly, Cam Gigandet, Aly Michalka
Directed By: Christian E. Christiansen
DEUCES WILD (2002)
Critics Consensus: Melodramatic and weighed down with silly dialogue, Deuces Wild is a forgettable, overheated thriller that leaves no cliche unturned.
Synopsis: Leon (Stephen Dorff) and Bobby (Brad Renfro) are brothers who, with their friends, are determined to maintain the way of... [More]
Starring: Stephen Dorff, Brad Renfro, Fairuza Balk, Norman Reedus
Directed By: Scott Kalvert
THE MOD SQUAD (1999)
Critics Consensus: The Mod Squad aims for stylish cool and thrilling adventure, but collapses in an incoherent jumble of dated source material and unintentional hilarity.
Synopsis: Julie (Claire Danes) is on her way to jail for assault. Arsonist Linc (Omar Epps) is looking at serious prison... [More]
Starring: Claire Danes, Giovanni Ribisi, Omar Epps, Dennis Farina
Directed By: Scott Silver
THE APPARITION (2012)
Critics Consensus: The Apparition fails to offer anything original, isn't particularly scary, and offers so little in the way of dramatic momentum that it's more likely to put you to sleep than thrill you.
Synopsis: Plagued by frightening occurrences in their home, Kelly (Ashley Greene) and Ben (Sebastian Stan) learn that a university's parapsychology experiment... [More]
Starring: Ashley Greene, Sebastian Stan, Tom Felton, Julianna Guill
Directed By: Todd Lincoln
HOUSE OF THE DEAD (2003)
Critics Consensus: A grungy, disjointed, mostly brainless mess of a film, House of the Dead is nonetheless loaded with unintentional laughs.
Synopsis: Simon (Tyron Leitso) and Greg (Will Sanderson) meet a group of friends and set out to attend a rave on... [More]
Starring: Jonathan Cherry, Tyron Leitso, Clint Howard, Ona Grauer
Directed By: Uwe Boll
DOWN TO YOU (2000)
Critics Consensus: Down to You is ruined by a bland, by-the-numbers plot and an awful script.
Synopsis: College coeds in New York City, Al (Freddie Prinze Jr.), the son of a celebrity chef (Henry Winkler), and Imogen... [More]
Starring: Freddie Prinze Jr., Julia Stiles, Selma Blair, Shawn Hatosy
Directed By: Kris Isacsson
WINNIE-THE-POOH: BLOOD AND HONEY (2023)
Critics Consensus: Oh, bother.
Synopsis: The days of adventures and merriment have come to an end, as Christopher Robin, now a young man, has left... [More]
Starring: Craig David Dowsett, Chris Cordell, Amber Doig-Thorne, Natasha Tosini
Directed By: Rhys Frake-Waterfield
BUCKY LARSON: BORN TO BE A STAR (2011)
Critics Consensus: A severely misguided and inept comedy incapable of even telling its single joke properly.
Synopsis: Innocent Midwesterner Bucky Larson (Nick Swardson) works in a dead-end job as a grocery bagger and has never even kissed... [More]
Starring: Nick Swardson, Christina Ricci, Don Johnson, Stephen Dorff
Directed By: Tom Brady
DEAL (2008)
Critics Consensus: Employing multiple cinematic clichés and milking stale performances, Deal proves inadequate for even the lowly regarded poker movie genre.
Synopsis: Tommy Vinson (Burt Reynolds), a former cardsharp, gave up poker years ago when his wife threatened to leave him. Tommy... [More]
Starring: Burt Reynolds, Bret Harrison, Shannon Elizabeth, Charles Durning
Directed By: Gil Cates Jr.
THE DARKNESS (2016)
Critics Consensus: The Darkness clumsily relies on an assortment of genre tropes, leaving only the decidedly non-frightening ghost of superior horror films in its wake.
Synopsis: Peter Taylor (Kevin Bacon), his wife Bronny and their two children return to Los Angeles after a fun-filled vacation to... [More]
Starring: Kevin Bacon, Radha Mitchell, Lucy Fry, David Mazouz
Directed By: Greg McLean
PASSION PLAY (2010)
Critics Consensus: Passion Play has a terrific cast, but don't be fooled - the only real question at the heart of this misbegotten mystery is what its stars were thinking.
Synopsis: A washed-up musician (Mickey Rourke) tries to protect an enigmatic winged woman (Megan Fox) from a merciless gangster (Bill Murray)... [More]
Starring: Mickey Rourke, Megan Fox, Bill Murray, Kelly Lynch
Directed By: Mitch Glazer
GETTING EVEN WITH DAD (1994)
Critics Consensus: Overly formulaic and tonally inconsistent, Getting Even with Dad tries for a sentimental conclusion it doesn't earn and winds up a slapsticky cash grab aimed at fans of Home Alone.
Synopsis: Con man Ray Gleason (Ted Danson) is going after one last heist -- a stash of rare coins -- when... [More]
Starring: Macaulay Culkin, Ted Danson, Glenne Headly, Saul Rubinek
Directed By: Howard Deutch
MCHALE'S NAVY (1997)
Critics Consensus: About as funny as a keelhauling, McHale's Navy will leave most viewers feeling they've been the victim of a particularly dishonorable discharge.
Synopsis: Shopkeeper McHale (Tom Arnold) is called back to captain the PT-73 and save a Caribbean island from annihilation.... [More]
Starring: Tom Arnold, Tim Curry, Dean Stockwell, David Alan Grier
Directed By: Bryan Spicer
ARSENAL (2017)
Critics Consensus: Aside from an opportunity to watch a mustachioed Nicolas Cage acting from under a wig and behind a prosthetic nose, Arsenal has depressingly little to offer.
Synopsis: The Lindel brothers, Mikey and JP, only had each other to rely on growing up. As adults, JP finds success... [More]
Starring: Nicolas Cage, John Cusack, Johnathon Schaech, Adrian Grenier
Directed By: Steven C. Miller
TWELVE (2010)
Critics Consensus: As pretentious as it is hopelessly clichéd, this Twelve is closer to zero.
Synopsis: A high-school dropout (Chace Crawford) sells drugs to his wealthy former classmates.... [More]
Starring: Chace Crawford, 50 Cent, Emma Roberts, Rory Culkin
Directed By: Joel Schumacher
THE TOY (1982)
Critics Consensus: A muddled and unfunny collision of two comedic titans, The Toy is unsuitable for children -- or anyone else seeking entertainment.
Synopsis: Unemployed journalist Jack Brown (Richard Pryor) is attempting to make ends meet as the night janitor in a ritzy department... [More]
Starring: Richard Pryor, Jackie Gleason, Scotty Schwartz, Ned Beatty
Directed By: Richard Donner
SHADOW CONSPIRACY (1997)
Critics Consensus: Rather than exciting audiences with a thrilling race against time, Shadow Conspiracy suggests there may be a secret cabal duping talented actors into selecting woefully deficient scripts.
Synopsis: Presidential aide Bobby Bishop (Charlie Sheen) runs into an old professor who tells him of a secret plot to assassinate... [More]
Starring: Charlie Sheen, Donald Sutherland, Linda Hamilton, Stephen Lang
Directed By: George P. Cosmatos
BECAUSE I SAID SO (2007)
Critics Consensus: Overly reliant on caricatures and lacking any human insight, Because I Said So is an unfunny, cliche-ridden mess.
Synopsis: Daphne Wilder (Diane Keaton) is the proud mother of three women: Milly (Mandy Moore), Maggie (Lauren Graham) and Mae (Piper... [More]
Starring: Diane Keaton, Mandy Moore, Lauren Graham, Piper Perabo
Directed By: Michael Lehmann
GODSEND (2004)
Critics Consensus: A murky thriller with few chills, Godsend features ludicrous dialogue, by-the-numbers plotting, and an excess of cheap shocks.
Synopsis: After Paul Duncan (Greg Kinnear) and his wife, Jessie (Rebecca Romijn-Stamos), lose their young son, Adam (Cameron Bright), in an... [More]
Starring: Greg Kinnear, Rebecca Romijn, Robert De Niro, Cameron Bright
Directed By: Nick Hamm, Frank M. Calo
THE WHOLE TEN YARDS (2004)
Critics Consensus: A strained, laugh-free sequel, The Whole Ten Yards recycles its predecessor's cast and plot but not its wit or reason for being.
Synopsis: After faking his death, former killer-for-hire Jimmy "The Tulip" Tudeski (Bruce Willis) retires to Mexico with his new wife, Jill... [More]
Starring: Bruce Willis, Matthew Perry, Amanda Peet, Kevin Pollak
Directed By: Howard Deutch
SERVING SARA (2002)
Critics Consensus: A romantic comedy that's neither funny nor particularly romantic, Serving Sara is a forgettable time waster.
Synopsis: When Sara (Elizabeth Hurley) is served divorce papers while she is in New York, she is stunned. Not about to... [More]
Starring: Matthew Perry, Elizabeth Hurley, Bruce Campbell, Amy Adams
Directed By: Reginald Hudlin
VAMPIRES SUCK (2010)
Critics Consensus: Witlessly broad and utterly devoid of laughs, Vampires Suck represents a slight step forward for the Friedberg-Seltzer team.
Synopsis: Becca, an angst-ridden teenager, is torn between two supernatural suitors: vampire Edward and werewolf Jacob. However, she must find a... [More]
Starring: Matt Lanter, Jenn Proske, Chris Riggi, Ken Jeong
Directed By: Jason Friedberg, Aaron Seltzer
MOVIE 43 (2013)
Critics Consensus: A star-studded turkey, Movie 43 is loaded with gleefully offensive and often scatological gags, but it's largely bereft of laughs.
Synopsis: Twelve directors, including Peter Farrelly, Griffin Dunne and Brett Ratner, contributed to this collection of outrageous spoofs and stories. A... [More]
Starring: Elizabeth Banks, Kristen Bell, Halle Berry, Leslie Bibb
Directed By: Steven Brill, Peter Farrelly, Will Graham, Steve Carr
CODE NAME: THE CLEANER (2007)
Critics Consensus: Code Name: The Cleaner is a limp action/comedy flick that alternates between lame, worn-out jokes and cheesy martial arts.
Synopsis: When Jake (Cedric the Entertainer) awakes one morning in a strange hotel room, he finds himself in a bit of... [More]
Starring: Cedric the Entertainer, Lucy Liu, Nicollette Sheridan, Mark Dacascos
Directed By: Les Mayfield
FLATLINERS (2017)
Critics Consensus: Flatliners falls flat as a horror movie and fails to improve upon its source material, rendering this reboot dead on arrival.
Synopsis: Five medical students embark on a daring and dangerous experiment to gain insight into the mystery of what lies beyond... [More]
Starring: Diego Luna, Nina Dobrev, James Norton, Kiersey Clemons
Directed By: Niels Arden Oplev
SPEED 2: CRUISE CONTROL (1997)
Critics Consensus: Speed 2 falls far short of its predecessor, thanks to laughable dialogue, thin characterization, unsurprisingly familiar plot devices, and action sequences that fail to generate any excitement.
Synopsis: Annie (Sandra Bullock) is looking forward to a Caribbean cruise with her cop boyfriend, Alex (Jason Patric), who purchased the... [More]
Starring: Sandra Bullock, Jason Patric, Willem Dafoe, Temuera Morrison
Directed By: Jan de Bont
THE COVENANT (2006)
Critics Consensus: The Covenant plays out like a teen soap opera, full of pretty faces, wooden acting, laughable dialogue, and little suspense.
Synopsis: In the 17th century, five families with supernatural powers make a pact of silence. Eventually one power-hungry family is banished.... [More]
Starring: Steven Strait, Toby Hemingway, Chace Crawford, Taylor Kitsch
Directed By: Renny Harlin
THE FOG (2005)
Critics Consensus: The Fog is a so-so remake of a so-so movie, lacking scares, suspense or originality.
Synopsis: The prosperous town of Antonio Bay, Ore., is born in blood, as the town's founders get their money by murdering... [More]
Starring: Tom Welling, Maggie Grace, Selma Blair, DeRay Davis
Directed By: Rupert Wainwright
ZOOM (2006)
Critics Consensus: Lacking the punch and good cheer of The Incredibles and Sky High, Zoom is a dull and laugh-free affair.
Synopsis: Capt. Zoom, or Jack (Tim Allen), as he is now known, has long since given up his career of fighting... [More]
Starring: Tim Allen, Courteney Cox, Spencer Breslin, Kate Mara
Directed By: Peter Hewitt
A LITTLE BIT OF HEAVEN (2011)
Critics Consensus: A Little Bit of Heaven subjects viewers to a whole bunch of schmaltz - and strands Kate Hudson and Gael García Bernal in a fatally misguided film.
Synopsis: New Orleans ad executive Marley Corbett (Kate Hudson) is a free-spirited woman who embraces her easy sexuality, shuns commitment, and... [More]
Starring: Kate Hudson, Gael García Bernal, Kathy Bates, Lucy Punch
Directed By: Nicole Kassell
MATERIAL GIRLS (2006)
Critics Consensus: Plagued by paper-thin characterizations and a hackneyed script, Material Girls fails to live up to even the minimum standards of its genre.
Synopsis: Two sibling cosmetics heiresses (Hilary Duff, Haylie Duff) must grow up quickly when a company scandal leaves them penniless. Though... [More]
Starring: Hilary Duff, Haylie Duff, Anjelica Huston, Brent Spiner
Directed By: Martha Coolidge
MORTAL KOMBAT ANNIHILATION (1997)
Critics Consensus: With its shallow characters, low budget special effects, and mindless fight scenes, Mortal Kombat - Annihilation offers minimal plot development and manages to underachieve the low bar set by its predecessor.
Synopsis: Every generation, a portal opens up between the Outerworld and Earth. Emperor Shao-Kahn (Brian Thompson), ruler of the mythical Outerworld,... [More]
Starring: Robin Shou, Talisa Soto, James Remar, Sandra Hess
Directed By: John R. Leonetti
BLOODRAYNE (2005)
Critics Consensus: BloodRayne is an absurd sword-and-sorcery vid-game adaptation from schlock-maestro Uwe Boll, featuring a distinguished (and slumming) cast.
Synopsis: In 18th-century Romania, after spending much of her life in a traveling circus, human-vampire hybrid Rayne (Kristanna Loken) escapes and... [More]
Starring: Kristanna Loken, Michael Madsen, Michelle Rodriguez, Ben Kingsley
Directed By: Uwe Boll
SCARY MOVIE V (2013)
Critics Consensus: Juvenile even by Scary Movie standards, this fifth installment offers stale pop culture gags that generate few laughs.
Synopsis: Much bizarre activity follows after a husband (Simon Rex) and wife (Ashley Tisdale) bring their newborn infant home from the... [More]
Starring: Ashley Tisdale, Simon Rex, Erica Ash, Katt Williams
Directed By: Malcolm D. Lee
IN THE NAME OF THE KING: A DUNGEON SIEGE TALE (2007)
Critics Consensus: Featuring mostly wooden performances, laughable dialogue, and shoddy production values, In the Name of the King fulfills all expectations of an Uwe Boll film.
Synopsis: As war looms in an idyllic kingdom, a man named Farmer (Jason Statham) begins a heroic quest to find his... [More]
Starring: Jason Statham, John Rhys-Davies, Ray Liotta, Matthew Lillard
Directed By: Uwe Boll
THE COLD LIGHT OF DAY (2012)
Critics Consensus: No consensus yet.
Synopsis: Young business consultant Will Shaw (Henry Cavill) flies to Spain for a vacation aboard his family's sailboat. When Will returns... [More]
Starring: Henry Cavill, Verónica Echegui, Bruce Willis, Sigourney Weaver
Directed By: Mabrouk El Mechri
A LOW DOWN DIRTY SHAME (1994)
Critics Consensus: A trifecta of failure for writer-director-star Keenen Ivory Wayans, A Low Down Dirty Shame lives repeatedly and resolutely down to its title.
Synopsis: After hitting a wall in his case against drug kingpin Ernesto Mendoza (Andrew Divoff), private eye Andre Shame (Keenen Ivory... [More]
Starring: Keenen Ivory Wayans, Charles S. Dutton, Jada Pinkett Smith, Salli Richardson-Whitfield
Directed By: Keenen Ivory Wayans
JUST GETTING STARTED (2017)
Critics Consensus: A thoroughly unfunny misfire, Just Getting Started manages the incredible feat of wasting more than a century of combined acting experience from its three talented leads.
Synopsis: Duke Diver is living the high life as the freewheeling manager of a luxurious resort in Palm Springs, Calif. He... [More]
Starring: Morgan Freeman, Tommy Lee Jones, Rene Russo, Joe Pantoliano
Directed By: Ron Shelton
THE LAST AIRBENDER (2010)
Critics Consensus: The Last Airbender squanders its popular source material with incomprehensible plotting, horrible acting, and detached joyless direction.
Synopsis: The four nations of Air, Water, Earth and Fire lived in harmony until the Fire Nation declared war. A century... [More]
Starring: Noah Ringer, Dev Patel, Nicola Peltz Beckham, Jackson Rathbone
Directed By: M. Night Shyamalan
