How to Cite: 
Khaled, C., Ali, A. B., & Mustapha, C. I. (2024). The importance of physical tests in evaluating the level of some physical attributes of soccer players. International Journal of Health Sciences, 8(S1), 324-338. https://doi.org/10.53730/ijhs.v8nS1.14779  
 
 
The importance of physical tests in evaluating the level of some physical attributes of soccer players  
 
 
Chennouf Khaled 
Institut Sciences and Techniques of Physical and Sport Activities, University Of Tesmssilt, Algeria 
Corresponding author email: khaled.chenouf@univ-tissemsilt.dz  
 
Adda Ben Ali 
Institut Sciences and Techniques of Physical and Sport Activities, University Of 
Mohamed Kheider Biskra, Algeria 
Email: benali.adda@univ-biskra.dz  
 
Chalal Ismail Mustapha 
Institut Sciences and Techniques of Physical and Sport Activities, University of Tesmssilt, Algeria 
Email: Chamustdz@gmail.com  
 
 
Abstract---The study that is in your hands aims to know the importance of physical tests in evaluating the level of some physical attributes of soccer players , and for that we followed the descriptive approach, where the sample of the study amounted to 16 coaches and we used to collect data the questionnaire whose results were analyzed by calculating k2 and percentages, The most important results of the study are that most of the trainers are aware of the importance of physical tests in evaluating some physical characteristics, so we find that they use them Before each stage of training, to know the current level of the player, and thus set the appropriate program. The study reported that the trainers perform physical tests after each stage of training to determine the extent of the development of the level of some qualities, and the results obtained from physical tests help determine the training program and it We recommend conducting periodic tests to measure the level of physical attributes of the players and providing physical tests and modern methods for coaches.  
 
Keywords---physical tests, physical traits, football. 
 
 
 

 
International Journal of Health Sciences ISSN 2550-6978 E-ISSN 2550-696X (c) 2024. 
Manuscript submitted: 27 Nov 2023, Manuscript revised: 09 Jan 2024, Accepted for publication: 18 Feb 2024 
324 
1. Introduction  
 
Football is one of the most popular sports in the world if not the first and has recently seen a quantum leap caused by States' competition, Especially European ones to achieve excellence in this game, and scientific research has contributed to shortening time and enriching the knowledge aspect of this game, Sports selection is the first door used by coaches to form a football team and aims at selecting the best players in every skill, Morphology, physiology and psychology. In order for this process to be codified and positive results to be obtained, some basic stages must be followed, including physical tests focusing on the physical factor that is one of the most important ingredients of the team's success in general and the player in particular. The fitness aspect is a necessary requirement for any player and team as the team has been able to deliver correct football in the midst of competitions taking place in the ballparks. Sports form also plays a major role in the victories and the success of teams in physical conflict throughout the games and tournaments because the physical side gives a great boost to any team in presenting the coach's thoughts and a perfect performance within the green rectangle that the focus will be present due to the fitness side. 
 
Hence, the role of the assessment process for the footballer and the improvement of the level of physical qualities where physical tests can reveal what is this allows coaches to know the true physical level of the players. The player himself is obliged to take certain exercises and undergo tests to assess the physical qualities in order to perform the required role in the games. The coach and some specialists follow the players throughout the season. However, this is not what we see on our stadiums and trainers often neglect these tests for different reasons, relying solely on random observation (chalan, 1994, p. 26).  Football is characterized by the ease of theoretical skills and difficulty in implementing them during the competition. Attention to small age groups has become familiar in all sports, especially football, by selecting young players who meet the conditions of the game and developing them to compete and obtain titles This is due to the belief of those responsible for these institutions that the young age groups are the basic base that is regarded as a reservoir for the Akabar team and must therefore be taken care of in order to benefit from it in the future. The adoption of a number of projects by the Governments of States to ensure that they take care of them. The professional policy adopted by the Governments of States is a favourable opportunity for this category to honor national and international colors.  (Khamtar, 1994, p. 34) The problem with the study is therefore determined by the question: Is physical tests important in assessing the level of certain physical qualities of footballers. 
 
Sub-questions 
 	 
• Does the use of physical tests help to assess the level of certain physical qualities of footballers? 
• Physical test results help assess the level of certain physical qualities of footballers. 
 
 
2. Research hypotheses 
 
From the point of view of the research problem, we can formulate the general premise as follows: 
 
- Physical tests are important in assessing the level of certain physical qualities of footballers. 
 
2.1. Sub-hypotheses 
 
- The use of physical tests helps to assess the level of certain physical qualities of footballers. 
- Physical test results help assess the level of certain physical qualities of footballers. 
 
3. Research objectives 
 
- Know the role of physical tests in assessing the level of certain physical qualities of footballers. 
 
4. The importance of research 
 
This research can be very important from both scientific and practical aspects. scientific aspect can be seen as a contribution to the enrichment and valuation of the university library in order to assist teachers and trainers, On the practical side, the results of this study may be used to guide both coaches and players on the subject of physical testing, which is important for athletes, in addition to enriching the scientific balance of coaches in particular. 
 
5. Terms used in the study 
 
5.1. Physical tests 
 
Linguistic definition: The test in the language means (exam) and the word "tell" means (exam) or (tryit). 
 
Procedural Definition: A codified exercise developed to measure something specific or is a structured way of comparing the behavior of two or more people (the tool used to gather information for evaluation). 
The test can be given in the form of (written test, oral test or practical test) (lakrash, 2015, p. 133) 
 
5.2. Evaluation 
 
Valuation Language: From an evaluator, that is value. 
Terminology: Giving the evaluator his value and right, which is a qualitative and descriptive estimate (Hassan, Good, Minus), diagnosis and sentencing (Abu Harja, Makarem, 1999, p. 96). 
 
The evaluation process is defined as a management activity that accurately measures the achievement of the goals and targets required. and focusing on two main activities that follow the implementation process and monitor errors in it human resources management strategy ", reporting for appropriate decisionmaking and constituting the penultimate phase of the development of the human resources management strategy At this stage, we ask the question whether we have achieved the objective, and the answer to this question requires careful examination of the mechanism and its steps. In a way that ensures performance measurement that provides the opportunity for a real comparison between preplanned performance and actual performance, and the identification of deviations. (Pick, 1996, p. 57) 
 
Procedural definition: Evaluation can be defined as the judgment process, quantitative or qualitative about the results of objective tests and measurements enabled to determine the capabilities and characteristics of individuals. 
 
5.3. Physical qualities 
 
Physical and mathematical educators call the term "physical qualities" or "motor" to express motor or physical abilities, to humans and include both (Strength, speed, endurance, agility, flexibility) and associate these qualities with what we call "Sporting formulation" consisting of physical, planning and psychological elements while physical and sports education scientists in the United States of America call it "Fitness ingredients" as one of the ingredients of overall human fitness, which includes social, psychological, emotional and physical fitness components of them is the preceding elements according to the opinion of the Eastern Bloc as well as the (disease resistance, physical strength, muscle skin, respiratory periodic endurance muscle capacity, compatibility, balance and precision). 
 
Procedural Definition: Demonstrates the athlete's ability to enjoy the highest degree of strength with the speed of performance as long as possible as well as the individual's building of motivation and increase in work.  (Hassan, p. 505) 
 
6. Previous studies and similar research 
 
6.1 Study by Yazeed Amoura: (2014), under the heading "The importance of physical tests in assessing the fitness level of handball players has a middle class under 21 years of age male". (Yazeed Amoura-2014, p. 65) 
 
Objectives of the study 
 
1. Highlight the role of physical tests in assessing the level of some of the physical qualities of the lower handball players at the beginning of the sporting season. 
2. Determine the extent to which the physical qualities of the players between the beginning of the sports season and the first stage of the competitions and determine the relationship of the level of some elements of the physical qualities to the number of participation in the competitions during the first phase of the competitions. 
 
Study method: analytical descriptive. 
Sample: Deliberate sample, petroleum sports complex team, 17 players. 
 
The most important results of the study 
 
1. Most players find their physical qualities to be of a good standard in the light of the specific levels of the team under consideration. 
2. The existence of statistically significant differences between tribal and post measurement and remoteness in most measured physical qualities inferred the effectiveness of the coach's training program and found a correlation between the level of physical qualities of players and the number of participants in competitions, from which he concluded the relationship of coaching practiced with competition requirements. 
 
6.2. Study by Karash Ramzi: (2015, p. 88) Assessing some physical abilities in selecting footballers through some physical tests from football coaches (Karash Ramzi-2015), p. 85) 
 
Objectives of the study 
 
1. Evaluate the components of the physical performance of footballers through some tests. 
Study method: The researcher used the descriptive method. 
Sample: The sample consisted of 23 players Setif breeding team. Study tools: Test tool. 
 
The most important findings of the study 
 
1. A coach who relies on competitive interviews and observations during the selection process finds it difficult to deal with players during the training process, as well as requiring them time so that he can discover the players' real abilities. 
2. The use of calendar tests during the selection process is a scientific process and its effectiveness is demonstrated in the results achieved by the team if it is envisaged in a scientific and systematic training method. Therefore, coaches must rely on this method to select their players at all levels and ages, because it is indeed a guaranteed process, provided that the scientific follow-up process conducts training programmes, and adopts a clear and scientific training. 
 
7. Research methodology and field procedures 
 
7.1. Reconnaissance study 
 
Exploratory study is the first step in any field study in order to familiarize ourselves with the topic of research so that we can know the different aspects to be studied in our exploratory study to inform and take note of the various aspects of the problem addressed to our research, It is exploratory research that addresses new topics that no researcher has ever touched upon and for which no data or information is available until the researcher knows much about their dimensions  (Thabet, 1984, p. 47) 
We went to some clubs to diagnose and gather information and ideas and verify hypotheses. 
 
7.2. Study method 
 
The curriculum in scientific research is the way in which researchers study the problem, discover the truth (Beouche and Denibat, 1995, p. 79). It is agreed that the research curriculum varies according to the subjects and problems at stake. We have chosen the survey descriptive curriculum, because of the nature of the problem posed to the importance of physical tests in assessing the level of physical qualities from the trainees' point of view.thodology. 
 
7.3. Research Community 
 
It is all individuals, events or objects who are the subject of the research problem and within the subject matter dealt with. The research community is embodied in the coaches of the 16 trainers of the honorary clubs of the state of Tlemcen Cubs. 
 
7.4. Sample research 
 
The sample is the study community from which field data are collected, and is considered to be part of the whole in the sense that a group of members of the community is taken, but is representative of the community, to be studied in a particular part or a certain percentage of the whole community. Sample units may be persons such as neighbourhoods, cities or otherwise, and for psychology and pedagogy they are persons (Mohammed Nasraldin, p. 14). 
Due to the limited size of the search community, we have restricted all the applicable items to any 16 trainers of the honorary clubs of the state of Tlemcen. 
 
7.5. Research areas 
7.5.1. Time period 
 
The theoretical aspect study in Feffrey lasted until the end of March, and the field study was conducted from 24 Feffrey to 30 October 2021. 
 
7.5.2. Spatial period 
 
The study was conducted at the level of the honorary clubs of the state of Tlemcen 
 
Table 1. Shows the clubs of the Honorary Section of the State of Tlemcen 
 
Mechal Fath sid el Nasr Itihad sebdou fellaousen abdeli dermam 
Itihad bab el assa Jil 	abou 
tachfine Ouifak sebdou Taradji zenata Chabab remchi el Fath 	ben 
sakrane Itihad youcef ain Amel el abed Chabab 
fettah ain Chabab ain 
talout Chabab souahlia el Mouloudiat khemisti  
7.5.3. Human period 
 
Our study was limited to the coaches of the honorary clubs of the state of Tlemcan. 
 
7.6. Search variables 
7.6.1. Independent Variable 
 
The independent variable is the variable that the researcher assumes is the cause or one of the reasons for a particular result and his study may lead to knowledge of its impact on another variable (Mohammed Alawi and Usama Salary, p. 219). In our independent variable, study is the "importance of physical tests." 
 
7.6.2. Dependent variable 
 
Is the result of the independent variable, a phenomenon that exists, disappears or changes when the independent variable researcher applies or replaces it (Hussein El Shafi, Mohamed Abidin and Susan Ahmed, 2009, p. 74). 
In this subordinate variable study is an "assessment of the level of physical traits". 
 
7.7. Search Tools 
The questionnaire 
 
The search form is based on two axes distributed to the trainers and each axis of a set of questions related to each axis where we used closed questions included 14 phrases. 
- The first theme, entitled "The use of civic tests helps to assess the level of certain physical qualities of footballers". 
- The second theme, entitled "Physical test results help to assess the level of certain physical characteristics of football". 
 
7.8. Study of Scientific Foundations 
7.8.1. The validity of experts 
 
The questionnaire was presented to a group of 5 specialized professors between: 25 March 2021 to 5 October 2021 to express an opinion on the appropriateness of the paragraphs of the questionnaire in terms of ease, clarity, the paragraph's relationship to the axis, its relationship to the questionnaire, content, drafting and language, the deletion of any paragraph or paragraphs, and the suggestion of what they deem appropriate to inform this study. 
 
Three replies were proposed to the arbitrators as follows: refusal, requires modification, after data collection and discharge, with acceptance of paragraphs that have achieved an acceptance rate of 80% or more with modification of other phrases, acceptance if achieved high agreement ratio phrases that are less than 80% accepted are not accepted and replaced by phrases that have the same content by the adjudicating professors, either because of language difficulty, lack of content or the like. 
 
7.8.2. Consistency 
 
We distributed the form to the trainers and 10 days later, we did the same process. We found that it was almost the same answers and so we ascertained the quality of the test. After the exploratory study, we extracted the instrument we used in the research with validity. 
 
Table 1. Shows the survey's persistence study 
 

Statistical study  	sample 	Degrees 	Level of 	Tabular 	 
Axes 	size 	of 	statistical 	Value 	Constant 
	Freedom    connotation  	Factor 
           (n-  1) 
Using physical tests helps assess the level of some physical qualities of footballers 7 6 0.05 0.625 0.88 Physical test results help assess the level of some physical qualities of footballers     0.86  
Table 2 notes that the constant factor (0.88-0.86) is greater than the tabular value (0.625) at the degree of freedom (6) and the level of indication (0.05). This confirms that the questionnaire and its vertebrae are highly stable. 
 
7.8.3. Questionnaire substantively 
 
The paragraphs of the questionnaire are understandable, easy and clear, especially since the testers received a comprehensive explanation of them (the answer is personal, the obligation to answer all phrases) with the obligation not to intervene or suggest an answer, with any question asked if there was a clause unclear, and after the sample's answers were discharged it became clear that the sample responded easily to all paragraphs, which indicates the objectivity of the response. 
 
 
 
8. Analysis and discussion of results 
 
The first theme: The use of physical tests helps to assess the level of certain physical qualities of footballers. 
Question 1: Do you use physical tests to assess certain physical traits? 
Purpose of the question: To know the proportion of physical tests used in evaluating certain physical traits. 
 
Table 3. Shows the proportion of physical tests used in evaluating certain physical characteristics 
 
Propos
al Repetitio ns Percenta
ge %  K2 Calculat ed K2 
Tabul
ar Degree Of Freedom Significa nce Level Decision Yes 16 100 16 3.84 1 0.05 Statistic ally  No 0 00 total 16 100  
 
Figure 1. Shows the proportion of physical tests used in evaluating certain physical traits 
 
From table 3, we note that the percentage of trainers who rely on the use of physical tests is 100%, while we find 00% is the proportion of trainers who do not rely on physical tests. The calculated value of C2 and 16 is greater than C2 tabular of 3.84 at the indicative level of 0.05 and the degree of freedom 1 indicates statistically significant differences. 
Conclusion: Most trainers rely on physical tests to assess physical traits 
Question 2: Do the physical tests applied help you assess some physical traits? Purpose of the question: To know the extent to which physical tests applied are used to assess certain physical qualities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4. Proportion of use of physical tests applied in assessing certain physical characteristics 
 
Propos
al Repetitio ns Percenta
ge %  K2 	 
Calculat ed K2 	 
Tabul
ar Degree 
Of 
Freedo m Significa nce Level Decision Yes 13 81.25 6.25 3.84 1 0.05 Statistica lly  No 3 18.75 Total 16 100  
 
Figure 2. Shows the proportion of physical tests used to assess certain physical characteristics 
 
From table 4, we note that the percentage of trainers who rely on the use of applied physical tests is 81.25%, while 18.75% is the proportion of trainers who do not rely on applied physical tests. The calculated value of C2 and 6.24 is greater than C2 table of 3.84 at the indicative level of 0.05 and the degree of liberty 1, indicating differences of statistical significance. 
Conclusion: We conclude that most trainers rely on physical tests applied to the assessment of physical traits. 
Theme II: Physical test results help assess some of footballers' physical qualities Question 1: The results obtained from the tests help you determine the objectives of your training program. 
The purpose of the question: To know how much the results obtained from the tests help determine the objectives of your training program. 
 
Table 5. Shows the proportion of physical test results assisted in determining the objectives of the training program 
 
Proposal Repetition s Percentage%   K2 	 
Calculated K2 	 
Tabular Degree Of Freedom Significance Level Decision Yes 10 62.5 9.55 5.99 2 0.05 Statistically 
 No 0 37.5 Sometimes 6 0 Total 16 100  
 Figure 3. Shows the proportion of physical test results assisted in determining the objectives of the training program 
 
From the table, we note that the percentage of trainers that the results obtained  from physical tests help them determine the objectives of the training program is 62.5%, whereas 00% is the percentage of trainers that the results obtained from the physical tests help them determine the objectives of the training program 37.5% the percentage of the answer is sometimes and the calculated value of C2 of 9.55 is greater than the tabular C2 of 5.99 at the indicative level of 0.05 and the degree of freedom 2, indicating statistically significant differences. 
Conclusion: The majority of trainers help them to determine the objectives of the training program. 
Question II: Are minimum test results useful for determining quota content? Purpose of question: How useful physical test results are in determining quota content. 
 
Table 6. Usefulness of Physical Test Results in Determining Quota Content. 
 
Propos
al Repetition s Percentag
e%   K2 	 
Calculate d K2 	 
Tabula
r Degree 
Of 
Freedo m Significan ce Level Decision Yes 16 100 16 3.84 1 0.05 Statisticall y 
 No 0 0 Total 16 100  
 
Figure 4. Utility ratio of physical test results in determining quota content. 
From the table we note that the percentage of trainers who have said that there is the usefulness of physical test results in determining the content of the quota 100% while the 00% is the proportion of trainers who have said it is not helpful and the calculated value of C2 of 16 is greater than the tabular C2 of 3.84 at the indicative level of 0.05 and the degree of freedom 1 indicates statistically significant differences. 
Conclusion: We conclude that all trainers are unanimous on the usefulness of physical tests in determining the content of the unit. 
Question 3: Physical test results help you know the severity of the right exercise. The purpose of the question: To know how helpful the results of the tests are in determining the severity of the appropriate exercise. 
 
Table 7. The extent to which the results help the tests determine the intensity of the appropriate exercise. 
 
Proposal Repetitio ns Percentage  
%  K2 	 
Calculated K2 	 
Tabular Degree 
Of 
Freedom Significance Level Decision Yes 6 37.5 0.49 3.84 1 0.05 NO 
Statistically 
 No 4 25 Sometimes 6 38 Total  100  
 
Figure 5. The ratio of assistance of results shows tests in determining the intensity of the appropriate exercise 
 
From the table, we note that the percentage of trainers who are assisted by the results obtained from physical tests in determining the appropriate exercise intensity is 37.5%, while 25% is the proportion of trainers who are not assisted by the results obtained from physical tests in determining the objectives of the training program 37.5% is the response percentage sometimes and the calculated value of C2 of 0.49 is smaller than the table of C2 of 5.99 at the indicative level of 0.05 and Freedom 2, indicating that there are no statistically significant differences, i.e. the difference is not D. 
Conclusion: We conclude that there are differences in trainers' opinions regarding assisting test results in determining the severity of the appropriate exercise 
9. Meet results with hypotheses 
 
We have developed our research hypotheses to highlight the importance of physical tests in assessing the level of certain physical qualities of Cubs footballers and divided into two hypotheses. After presenting the results described in the previous tables, we come to discuss the hypotheses in order to ascertain their correct or incorrect. 
 
9.1. Discussion of the first hypothesis 
 
After conducting the questionnaire, analyzing it, obtaining the results and doing the statistical calculations, and through the questionnaire addressed to the coaches of the honorary department of the state of Tlesan Class of Cubs, we note that there are differences in favor of answering yes, i.e. that coaches gather to use physical tests to help assess the level of some physical qualities of footballers And also for the c2 value calculated in the bulk of the results was greater than the 3.84 table c2 at freedom score 1 and the 0.05 indicator level, and the only explanation for that results is that difference D and the importance of physical tests in assessing the level of physical qualities of footballers, This is all found in the results of the following tables (3,4,5,6,7,8,9) and it is clear to us that trainers use physical tests before and after each stage of training taking into account the selection of appropriate tests of quality. 
 
Based on the results obtained in previous tables, theoretical background and previous studies, he makes sure that physical tests help to assess some of the physical qualities of footballers, from which we say that the first hypothesis that "physical tests are used helps to assess the level of certain physical qualities of footballers" was achieved. This is what the previous study, entitled The Importance of Physical Tests in Assessing the Level of Fitness of Footballers, Mushri Salahuddin, Mohammed Boudiaf University, pointed out: The importance of physical tests in assessing footballers' fitness level was one of the most important results of which was a correlation between the use of physical tests and the improvement of the physical qualities of footballers. 
 
9.2. Discussion of the second hypothesis 
 
After conducting the questionnaire, analyzing it, obtaining the results and doing the statistical calculations, and through the questionnaire addressed to the coaches of the Honorary Division of the State of Tlesan Class of Cubs, we note that there are differences in favor of answering yes, i.e. that coaches collect the results of physical tests helps in assessing the level of some physical qualities of footballers And also for the c2 value calculated in the bulk of the results was greater than the 3.84 table c2 at freedom score 1 and the 0.05 indicator level, and the only explanation for these results is that difference D and the importance of physical test results in assessing the level of physical qualities of footballers, all of which are found in the results of the following tables (10, 11, 13, 14 and 16). Based on the results obtained in the previous tables, theoretical background and previous studies, he makes sure that the results of the physical tests help to assess some of the physical qualities of the footballers, from which we say that the second hypothesis that "physical test results help to assess the level of certain physical qualities of the footballers" was achieved. The eighth study, entitled "Importance of Physical 
 
Test Results in Assessing the Level of Certain Physical Qualities of Footballers, Class Akbar from the Point of View of Coaches", University of Constantine 2011, where the forms presented were: Does Physical Test Results Help Assess the Level of Fitness of Footballers. 
 
9.3. Discussion of the general hypothesis 
 
The general premise of the research is: "Physical tests are important in assessing the level of certain civilian qualities of footballers." 
In the light of the results obtained in this research, the hypothesis gave her sincerity. It was confirmed that physical tests are important in assessing the level of certain physical qualities of footballers. This is what we found in our research, which was found by Mushari Salahuddin in his study the importance of physical tests in assessing the level of certain elements of fitness of footballers. physical tests were found to play a role in assessing the level of some elements of fitness performed by footballers 
 
10. Conclusion 
 
Through this research, we have tried to highlight the critical importance of physical tests in assessing the level of certain physical qualities of footballers, as they are necessary in the training process for many reasons because they perform essential functions: 
 
- Enable trainers to classify trainees into groups for training purposes. 
- Provide the methods on which designers can rely for effective and quality training programmes. 
- Knowing the trainer and the trainee about the course in which he is going, if they are making progress, they must continue. If they are the other way around, urgent solutions must be sought and new training plans and programmes adapted to the situation. 
- Monitoring progress that means the amount of development that players have gained as a result of the program's practice. This tracking makes the coach more assured and confident in the programs developed. It also helps to detect errors and shortcomings, thereby being an alarm tool at the speed of modification and change, especially as modern and appropriate means are available. Finally, we hope that these findings and the information obtained will be a gain in practical application and that this modest work will contribute to enriching scientific research in the field of physical and sporting activity. Thus, the improvement of our country's sporting level and the composition of the integrated and physically prepared player. In the light of this study, we have drawn some suggestions and recommendations that we summarize as follows: 
- Introduction of trainers and researchers in national and international contexts to benefit from modern methods and techniques of evaluation and testing. 
- The provision of various materials and modern means of conducting tests for players at different stages of the training season should be based mainly on physical and skill tests, whether informant or field to determine and follow up the level of certain physical qualities. 
- The need to prepare a programme of tests in addition to other programmes that complement the training process that affect the physical qualities of the footballer. 
- Periodic tests to measure players' physical qualities. 
 
References 
 
1. Abu Ali Abdel Fattah and Ibrahim chalan (1994), physiology of sports training, Arab Thought House, Egypt.. 
2. Khaled Hosni (1991) is a term in the curriculum of scientific research and methods, T2, Magdalawi Publishing and Distribution House, Oman. 
3. Mufti Ibrahim Hamada (1996), a ball to girls' football and the foundations of education. 
4. Mohammed Sobhi Hussein (1995), Measurement and Evaluation in Physical Education and Sports, edition 3, Arab Thought House. 
5. Mahmoud Mukhtar (1993) Tests and measurements of footballers. Cairo, House of Arab Thought. 
6. Same Mohammed Melhem (2014), Developmental Psychology, T3, Dar Al Thakr, Amman, Jordan. 
7. Baha 'eddin Salama (1994): Sports physiology, Egypt, Cairo, Dar al-Arabiya 
8. Mahmoud Awad al-Basioni (1992): Theories and Methods of Physical and Sports Education by the University Publications Office. 
9. Aladdin Kafi (2009): Elevation Psychology of Childhood and Adolescence, Dar al-Thakr, 1, Amman. 
10. Bastouisi Ahmed (1999): The Foundations and Theories of Sports Training, Arab Thought House, Cairo, Egypt. 
11. Fati Ibrahim (2001): Modern Sports Training, Dar al-Fakr al-Abi, Cairo. 
12. Mohammed Hassan Allawi, Mohammed Nasruddin Radwan (1994), Motor Performance Test, 3rd Edition, Arab Thought House. 
13. Leila Mr. Farhat (2005): Measurement and Testing in Sports Education, Book Publishing Center, Cairo. 
14. Ben Zeidan Hussein, et al. (2018) The impact of the use of visual exercises on the motor cognitive abilities of persons with minor intellectual disabilities 12-
10 years, Sports System Magazine, 5 (3) 96-112 
15. Marzouki Samir, Karcis Nabil (2018) The effectiveness of a proposed physical education program for the development of basic motor skills and physical qualities of fourth-year primary students (09 years,) Sports System magazine, 5 (3) 625-643. 
16. Alain Michel (1998):"foot - ball les systèmes de jeu", Edition Chiron, 2nd edition, paris . 
17. Gaubert. (2014). Les fondamontaux du sport santé 80 tools to better assess and support your practitioners. anphora. 
18. Reiman. (2009). functional testing in human performance, human kinitics. USA. 
 
      326  	 

 	325 
 



