The real impact of subsidies on the film industry (1970s-present): lessons from France and Korea
Introduction

Since the end of the Second World War, subsidies have been increasingly seen by film industries around the world as the perfect tool for challenging the continued dominance of Hollywood films. This is particularly the case as the US studios enjoy an abundant influx of capital and one of the largest pools of moviegoers. Coupled with this is the growing interest in subsidies among political circles outside the Unites States. This has been driven by the perception of the film industry as not only a form of mass culture, but also as part of a nation's soft power. Yet the true impact of subsidies upon the film industry continues to be much debated. Fortunately, with the passage of time, there is now sufficient data from two countries (France and Korea) to provide important lessons in understanding the true effects--positive and negative--of such subsidies on a nation's film industry.

Comparing France and Korea has many merits. Such an approach benefits immensely from the fact that these two countries exhibit both similarities and significant differences. The similarities manifest themselves in several ways. Both countries have been competing hard against Hollywood films. They see the prosperity of their respective cultural industries as an essential component in strengthening their national cultures. Their population, box office market size, and admissions per person are comparable: around 66 million, USD 1.4 billion, and 3.1 admissions per person for France, and around 50 million, USD 1.5 billion, and 4.2 admissions per person for Korea, as of 2015. (1) However, they are very different in one respect; France has implemented an intensive subsidy policy for its film industry since the 1950s, whereas Korea has granted very few subsidies to its film industry until very recently.

For a meaningful comparison, long-term data is needed. This is due to two reasons. First, examining a period shorter than one decade is likely to provide biased results, due to the unpredictable nature of success in the film business, political compromises needed for adopting film policies, and unexpected events that can have lagged or delayed effects, often appearing up to decades later. (2) Second, policies can have a declining impact over time. Hayward (2005) notes this point en passant in several cases. (3) Indeed, a full appraisal of these crucial aspects needs to be conducted over a long period, as will be shown in this paper. Although Messerlin and Parc (2014) undertook one of the first long-run comparisons, this paper presents an even deeper study. (4) It is based on an entirely different data set covering a forty-five year period and including three other European countries--hence capable of providing more robust lessons.

The data used in this paper are based on the best available official sources. Data on admissions and film revenues in France are from the Centre National du Cinema et de 1'Image Animee (CNC) which is the administrative arm of the Ministry of Culture in charge of collecting this information. CNC also provides comparable information for the three other European countries covered in this paper. Data on the French subsidies are based on CNC data and those provided by a special report from the Cour des Comptes (2012), which ensures the most exhaustive information possible. (5)

Collecting data for the Korean case is more complicated. Data on admissions and film revenues from 1960 to 2013 were compiled by Parc (2014) based on the Korea Film Council and the Ministry of Culture and Tourism of the Republic of Korea. (6) Data on subsidies in the cultural industry are based on Kim (2012, 2013) who compiled the relevant information provided by annual government budgets from 1974 to 2011. (7) It is noteworthy that data compiled by Kim (2012, 2013) are on subsidies to Korean cultural industries more generally, though a significant portion of those subsidies have been allocated to the film industry. However, most of the subsidies granted to the film industry since 2008 are based on a specific seat tax introduced in 2007. Data on the seat tax is provided by the Korean Film Council (KOFIC), and has been supplemented to Kim's data. Hence, this paper provides the highest estimate on subsidies to the Korean film industry. It is important to stress the fact that subsidies to the Korean film industry are actually smaller than the figures we used here, since our figures also include subsidies provided to other cultural industries. This fact makes the main lessons presented even stronger.

This paper is organized as follows. Section 1 reviews the existing literature. Section 2 presents a brief overview of French and Korean film policies. (8) Section 3 documents the rise of their respective subsidy components over the last forty-five years (1970-present). Section 4 provides simple and quantifiable measures of how well the proclaimed objectives of the French subsidies--to enlarge the domestic film market and to increase the attractiveness of domestic films--have been achieved. Section 5 turns to the question of diminishing returns and unintended negative consequences from subsidy policies in the French and Korean contexts. Lastly, the concluding section summarizes the main implications to be drawn from these long-term analyses of the French and Korean experiences.

1. Literature Review

Subsidies provided by the government to the film industry have proven to be a popular subject of scholarly enquiry, but with surprisingly little interest in robust empirical evidence. Proponents, such as Grant (1994), Karpe (1995), Horowitz and Davey (1996), Prowda (1996), Kim (1998), Kim (2000), Peltier (2003), and Doyle (2014) and others, (9) justified the importance of subsidies on the basis of two economic arguments. The first is the unfair advantage that scale economies in a highly capital-intensive and risky environment give to the Hollywood industry, and the second is the importance of preserving the cultural diversity that free markets cannot guarantee. It is also worth noting that some proponents of subsidies argue that public support is potentially the sign of a failing private sector unwilling to invest or take risks, such as in the case of the French film industry. (10) In this respect, existing subsidies could reinforce the reluctance of the private sector to invest.

Furthermore, it should be stressed that few of these studies provide any compelling quantitative evidence on the robustness of their arguments because they rely on data that cover far too short a period, hence they cannot take into account the negative effects of subsidies that can emerge later. For instance, Pak, Yi, Yun, and Kim (2014) examined the effect of Korean subsidies based on the seat tax with a data set from 2008 to 2014, and concluded that this tax has increased the number of jobs in the film industry and foreign sales of Korean films. (11) However, they did not examine the possibility that this growth could have been the mere continuation of unsubsidized growth emerging since the mid-1990s. Moreover, applying Pak et al.'s approach based on short periods cannot capture the whole picture of the negative consequences that might appear later as it has done in France: the seat tax introduced in France in 1949 has brought about unintended negative consequences to the French film industry from the 1990s until now.

Turning to the critical though often neglected issue of implementation, Kornai (1986) argues that subsidies, generally allocated through committees consisting of only a few people, may not support films but distort the market. For example, production companies have less motivation to behave in an entrepreneurial manner, while committees granting subsidies often ignore market needs. (12) In a similar manner, some scholars highlight the importance of competitiveness or quality of films, rather than subsidies. Looking at the case of the Italian film industry, Bagella and Becchetti (1999) show that the net impact of subsidies on total admissions--in other words the subsidy contribution to the success of domestic films--is insignificant and that the substantially lower performance of films rather depends on the quality of the films generated by a number of other factors. (13)

In the case of the German film industry, Jansen (2005) demonstrates that the most important factors for the success of a film industry are the traditional market functions associated with a film's quality, such as the skills of people closely related to business management, film project development, and realization. However, in contrast with Bagella and Becchetti (1999), Jensen finds that some subsidies tend to support producers that have consistently enjoyed above-average success with their films. (14) These two different cases hint at the fact that (1) the success of films is not related so much to subsidies per se, but rather to some other functions, and (2) there are both good and bad subsidies--meaning subsidies that bring net benefits and others that bring net costs. In this regard, Parc (2016) argues that subsidies related to infrastructure for the film industry can be beneficial, while emphasizing the function of the private sector. (15) A similar thought, though coupled with time distinction, is supported by evidence provided by Tannenwald (2010) of a case in the United States. (16) Tannenwald (2010) argues that film subsidies can only be a quick fix effort that functions as a short-term economic booster rather than an effort to further enhance the development of the film industry.

Finally, regarding comparison between the French and Korean film industries, there are several existing studies. Yet they all have several critical problems beside the limited data issue: (1) most of these studies treat the French film industry as unquestionably superior to the Korean one, and (2) others highlight only a few aspects without in-depth understanding, such as more diversity in terms of genre and the greater artistic value of French films compared with Korean ones. For instance, Chi (2007) argues that the Korean government should adopt French film policies because the domestic market share of the French film industry has increased from 1997 to 2006. (17) However, the short period covered by the aforementioned study distorts the whole picture: the 2006 market share (44.7%) is by far the highest for the period covered and the second highest when compared over a longer time span from 1990 to 2015. Moreover, this was followed by a much lower market share in 2007 (36.5%), which happens to be very close to the 1997 market share (34.8%).

To show the greater diversity of French films in terms of genre, Kim (2007) compared French and Korean film industries with data covering a few years (2001 to 2005), such as the number of films produced and released, the number of admissions, the number of movie theatres and screens, the share for each film distributor, and the size of VHS/DVD market. (18) However, none of these data are much related to diversity. Kim also asserts that the Korean film industry lacks sustainability because its domestic market has been opened up by Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) or by the screen quota cut. In this regard, he argues that the government should invest more to overcome these disadvantages and limit the function of the market economy in the Korean film industry. However, based on long-term data, Parc (2016) has shown the impressive performance of the Korean film industry since the mid-1990s achieved through internationalization, freer market functions, and the role of corporations through competition. Overall, this has helped the industry to become more sustainable and sophisticated. (19)

2. French and Korean Film Policies: An Overview

This section reveals the similarities over the long run between France and Korea. Despite the deep economic and political differences between France and Korea over the last seven to eight decades, both countries have implemented the same sequence of instruments--import quotas, screen quotas, and then subsidies--when designing their film policies, and in both cases subsidies have emerged as the instrument of last resort. Table 1 shows that most pre-subsidy instruments, such as quotas, have been progressively abolished, while others which are still part of existing domestic laws are not enforced for various reasons described in section 3. The profound economic and political forces behind such a similar evolution in policies are analyzed in section 3.

Both countries began with import quotas that required the production and export of a certain number of domestic films in exchange for a license to import foreign films, notable because foreign films are often considered more lucrative than domestic films. Interestingly, this measure was adopted in France during the early 1920s despite the opposition of the movie theatres, which were screening a large number of more profitable and popular American films. This opposition was also due to the fact that many movie theatres were built during this period, and that the small number of French films produced could not meet the increasing domestic demand generated by this increased number of movie theaters. The French import quota adopted in 1928 did not last long due to strong pressure from the US government and the creation of French subsidiaries by the Hollywood studios. The appearance of sound films, known as talkies, in the early 1930s, triggered other protectionist measures, such as the obligation to dub US films in the French language and a quota on the number of dubbed US films (150 in 1936, then 110 in 1952). (20)

The situation in Korea followed a similar pattern. The import quota regime was adopted in 1958 and lasted until 1985. During this long period, the Korean government enforced the import quota system, but amended the details of its management in order to revive the industry. However, this import quota was greatly misused by both government and business. Quality-based import quotas were poorly implemented (until 1966) by the government due to overriding political factors. When quantity-based import quotas replaced the old system (after 1966), it was mostly abused by business to import more lucrative foreign films. (22) In 1986, the import quota was abolished under US pressure as a result of two bilateral film agreements signed in 1985 and 1988, respectively. The screen quotas--nominally in place since 1966--became then the main instrument to protect the Korean film industry.

In 1946 and 1986, France and Korea, respectively, shifted to screen quotas that imposed a mandatory number of days for screening domestic films in theatres. In both cases, US pressure was the key--though far from unique--reason for such shifts, manifested by the Blum-Byrnes Agreement (1946) in the case of France and the Korea-US Film Agreements (1985 and 1988) with Korea. However, screen quotas do not protect domestic films because simply reserving a set number of screening days does not guarantee they will attract a larger audience during that specific period. (23) Interestingly, screen quotas still exist to some extent in France and Korea. However, they are defined in such a way that they do not represent binding requirements under current market conditions. For instance, the recent market share of Korean films domestically is much higher (55-60%) than the share that could be expected from the current screen quota system (73 days compared to the previous 146 days). (24) Similarly, French screen quotas have re-emerged under the form of private practices among movie theaters, known as engagements de programmation, or programming commitments. In a broad sense, they ensure, among other aspects, that at least 40 percent of movie theatre screenings are dedicated to European works. (25)

3. Development of French and Korean Subsidy Policies

An irresistible and massive rise of subsidies over the long run has been evident in the French film industry. This evolution reflects the enormous power devolved to the vested interests of the film industry by the way the French policy was designed--in particular, its sources of funding and its decision making procedures. By contrast, subsidies to the Korean film industry were insignificant until recently, although an increase in subsidies has been noticeable since the late-1990s. The current subsidy regime was implemented under the pretence of protection or even compensation for alleged losses. (26) Because it coincided with a boom in the Korean film industry, there have been many calls advocating further subsidies. However, the level of Korean subsidies is still low when compared with France.

3.1. French Subsidy Policy

The French demand for Hollywood movies and US pressure to open the French film market have induced a shift from quotas to subsidies, beginning in the very late 1940s. From an industry perspective, subsidies happen to be a much more powerful and flexible instrument than quotas and are more easily taken advantage of by those with vested interests. (27) The shift to subsidies was made possible by the imposition of a tax on ticket sales, also known as the seat tax, which has two key innovative legal features that explain its success. First, it is specific to the film industry. The movie theatres de facto raise the funds, and they are exclusively allocated to the film industry. Hence, these funds do not run the risk of being reallocated to other sectors of the domestic economy as they would if transiting through the general state budget. Second, the management of the subsidy scheme is operated by a specific institution, the CNC, which is both an administrative arm of the Ministry of Culture and an organization representing the film industry. CNC, with its many ad hoc committees where producers, distributors, and movie theatre owners are members, gives a strong voice to the industry.

Such a subsidy regime has the great advantage of smoothing over tensions among all the various segments of the film industry by a simple two-step process: all the vested interests unite in order to receive more support collectively, before then sharing these subsidies among themselves. This process ensures that all segments of the chain of production in the film industry can capture some subsidy benefits. By contrast, import and screen quotas devolve more power to one segment of the chain of production in the film industry: import quotas to importers and screen quotas to movie theatres. The pivotal segment is then in a position to reap most of the benefits of protectionist measures, to the detriment of others. This explains why the French seat tax, which was initially supposed to last for only four years, was easily renewed in 1953, and definitively entrenched into the French legal system in 1959. (28) Figure 1 shows that from 1981 until the present French subsidies to the film industry have continuously increased with no notable sign of reversing.

As a result, in 2014, the level of subsidies was more than three times (in constant euros) larger than the already substantial level reached in the 1970s. Consequently, the share of subsidies in the value added of the French film industry can be estimated to range from 32 to 78 percent for 2011, depending on the method of calculation. (30) This uninterrupted trend has been made possible only by imposing, in addition to the initial seat tax, new taxes under the same special legal statute--taxes on TV channels (1986), videos (2003), video-on-demand services (2007), and Internet subscriptions (2013). All these observations reveal the ability of those with vested interests to widen and deepen their grip on the subsidy regime. (31)

3.2. Korea's Subsidy Policy

Korea's subsidy policy has been the opposite of its French counterpart for most of the period covered. As shown in figure 1, subsidies were at an insignificant level until the late 1990s for several reasons. The most important of which was that successive governments did not consider the film industry to be a key driver for economic development until the mid-1990s. From 1998 to 2007, the growth of Korean subsidies remained very modest, amounting to less than three percent of the value added of the film industry. (32) This occurred even though the government increasingly recognized the importance of cultural industries as a source of sustainable economic development.

After twelve years of uninterrupted success, the Korean film industry faced a noticeable decline in 2007, which was generally interpreted as a result of the negative impact from the screen quota cut implemented in 2006. However, this decline was not directly related to a decrease in the supply of Korean films triggered by the screen quota cut, but to the quality of Korean films that resulted from a decrease of private investment to the film industry in the midst of radical changes in the film industry, such as Korea-US FTA negotiations and the predicted screen quota cut during the negotiations since the early 2000s. (33) Nevertheless, the dominant perception in the film industry during the negotiations was that the quota cut would cause its decline--hence the growing domestic calls for a new instrument to support the Korean film industry.

In response, the Korean government decided to increase the amount of subsidies to be granted to the film industry by adopting the seat tax in April 2007 as used in France and by entrusting its management to an institution similar to CNC, the KOFIC. Like France, this scheme was initially expected to last for only four years. Furthermore, these subsidies were renewed in 2014, again similar to what happened in France in 1953. Indeed, the growth of Korean subsidies in 2008-2011 looks very similar to what occurred during the period of 1982-1986 in France (see figure 1). Still, it is crucial to stress that currently the amount of subsidies in Korea is still much lower than in France.

4. Impact of Subsidies: Market Size, Market Share, and the Attractiveness of Domestic Films

In order to assess the impact of subsidies, the French and Korean film industries are compared by using two key indicators: the size of the overall film market and the market share of domestic films. These two indicators are robust enough to measure the attractiveness of a film industry, whose growth is the main goal of subsidies according to their advocates. The comparative results show that the more subsidized French industry does not fare as well as the unsubsidized Korean film industry. Moreover, this signifies that the attractiveness of French films has also deteriorated compared to German and Spanish films, an observation reinforcing the results drawn from the comparison between France and Korea.

4.1. Looking for Appropriate Indicators

The literature on film subsidies often uses the number of films produced as a criterion for assessing the subsidy policy. However, this indicator has serious methodological flaws as other factors can explain the large number of films produced. First, such an approach neglects the fact that increased subsidies are almost certain to generate more produced films. Second, subsidies may lead to overproduction, producing films that are never shown in movie theatres, as has happened with the French film industry. (34) Third, the fact that decisions to grant subsidies are made by committees dominated by representatives of the film industry (as in France) and decisions to grant import licenses are determined by officials (as in Korea in the context of import quotas during 1960s and 1970s) can also increase the number of often low-quality films produced. (35) Lastly, in a favourable business environment, production companies are motivated to produce a greater number of higher quality films in order to attract larger audiences. This has been the case with Korean film producers since the 2000s.

With these observations in mind, figure 2 offers two insights. First, the ratio of films produced in Korea to the number produced in France was initially almost one to one in 1978. This ratio continuously widened up to the mid-1990s, such that by 1998 one Korean film was produced for every four French films. This first phase witnessed the combined impact of two policies. On the one hand, large and increasing subsidies in France inflated that country's film production. On the other, the aftermath of import quotas and tightened screen quotas in Korea reduced its film production. Earnings from foreign films were not reinvested into Korean films, which automatically reduced the number of domestic films produced. At the same time, the abolition of import quotas and tightened screen quotas induced Korean companies to invest in Hollywood.

A very different second phase began in the late 1990s. While the number of French films continued to be artificially inflated by increasing subsidies, the redirected Korean investment from Hollywood to Korea in the early 1990s and the entry of chaebol, or Korean conglomerates, into film production helped to increase the attractiveness of Korean films. In later years, chaebol also boosted the number of productions without the help of subsidies. As of today, the number of films produced in Korea is almost on par with the number produced in France. The main observation here is that Korea has been more business-driven, whereas France has been more subsidy-driven.

Second, figure 2 presents the average audience size per film in Korea compared to that of France. The figure was similar until the early 1990s, but a dramatic change occurred thereafter and became more visible from 1998, following a brief dip caused by the economic crisis in the previous year. Since the early 1990s, the fewer films produced in Korea were able to attract a much larger domestic audience per film, on average three times more, than French films. It is noteworthy that this switch began during the early 1990s, hence it was unrelated to the provision of subsidies that became more notable in Korea a decade later. From these insights, two contrasting periods can be discerned in the Korean film industry, the early years with many unattractive films and the later years with a greater number of attractive films. This interesting contrast highlights the way in which a nonsubsidized film industry can produce movies that have the ability to attract a larger audience than a subsidized one.

4.2. Relative Sizes of the French and Korean Film Markets

The first justification for film subsidies is often to ensure that the overall film market--encompassing foreign and domestic films--can attract a large enough audience to facilitate an active and healthy cultural life. (38) The best way to assess this argument is to examine the size of the overall film market, which is measured by the total number of admissions for both foreign and domestic films. Since this paper is interested in comparing performances, figure 3 presents the relative size of the French and Korean markets. This comparison is accomplished by dividing the total admissions in Korea by the total admissions in France (shown on the left vertical axis). A relative size higher (lower) than 1 means that the Korean film market is larger (smaller) than the French one.

Figure 3 shows a huge swing in the relative size of the overall Korean market vis-a-vis its French counterpart. In 1970, the two countries had almost the same number of total admissions, as shown by a relative size of 0.9. The subsequent twenty-five-year period shows a deep and long-lasting collapse of the total admissions in Korea compared to a more limited and smaller decline in total admissions in France, both evolutions contributing to the plunge of the relative size of Korea/France to 0.3. However, the period from 1997 to 1999 reveals the sharp turning point mentioned before. After this period, the relative size of the overall Korean market vis-a-vis its French counterpart increases dramatically, except for a brief period between 2007 and 2009. In 2014, the overall Korean market was twelve percent larger than the French one--a result all the more remarkable considering the fact that the Korean population is 80 percent of the French population. The key lesson about the relative size comparison in figure 3 is that, even after years of decay, a nonsubsidized film market (Korea) has been able to reach a size larger than a highly subsidized one (France), in particular with the popularity of domestic films.

4.3. Admission Shares in France and Korea

In most cases, subsidies aim to discriminate between domestic and foreign films, usually in favour of the former. However, it is an open question as to whether these subsidies enhance the competiveness of domestic films. One of the key indicators to measure the competitiveness of domestic films is their attractiveness. (39) This can be measured by the share of admissions for domestic films of the total admissions for the country in question. Comparing the evolution of the admission shares for domestic films in the two countries can be done by calculating the annual admission gap between Korea and France. This is defined as the admission share of domestic films in Korea minus the admission share of domestic films in France. From 1970 to the mid-1990s, the gap (shown on the right vertical axis of figure 3) was largely negative: in other words, the attractiveness of domestic films in France was larger (on average by 14%) than that of domestic films in Korea.

However, a dramatic reversal of the situation is evident in the late 1990s. The admission gap rose sharply and became largely positive, save for the year 2008, meaning that the attractiveness of Korean films became significantly higher than that of French films. During this period, Korea rapidly achieved the same development level as France, and it can be safely assumed that the competitive pressures exerted by Hollywood films in the two countries have been roughly the same. As a result, the dramatic rise of the admission gap can be interpreted as reflecting largely an improvement of the attractiveness of Korean films mainly due to the enhancement in production quality relative to both Hollywood and French films. In short, the second key lesson to be drawn from figure 3 is that a nonsubsidized Korean film industry has been able to create more attractive films for its domestic audience than a continuously subsidized French film industry.

One could argue that the above two key lessons would only be robust if Korea were not significantly different from France. For instance, one could argue that audience tastes and preferences in these two countries are too contrasting, or the industrial structures of their film industries too different--two factors that could explain Korea's relative success compared to France. It is beyond the scope of this paper to examine these factors in detail. However, it should be stressed that the existence of these hypothetical differences should be carefully documented before being invoked. That said, there is a simple way to implement an initial test on the robustness of these two key lessons.

This approach seeks to calculate the admission gaps between France and its three large non-English speaking European neighbours (Germany, Italy, and Spain). The above two key lessons would be stronger if the intraEuropean admission gaps would follow the same evolution as the admission gap between France and Korea. Figure 4 shows that the admission gaps between France and its European neighbours are always negative--the same as was the case with Korea until the very late 1990s. Turning to their evolution over the period assessed, the admission gaps of France with Germany and Spain have increased over time--by twenty points with Germany and by nine points with Spain. (41) In other words, the attractiveness of German and Spanish films has significantly increased compared to that of French films or--if the film quality of these countries has not improved--the attractiveness of French films has deteriorated. Again, these evolutions are similar to the one observed with Korea, hence they help to support the two lessons drawn from the comparison of Korea with France.

5. Subsidies and Revenues: A Case of Diminishing Returns

Long-term data is necessary to shed some light on the dynamics of public subsidies by looking at a key question: has a permanent regime of ever growing subsidies had a constant impact over time, or is there some sign of its diminishing returns? What follows shows a clear trend of diminishing returns from subsidies with respect to revenues that raises questions about the sustainability of the current policy in the long run. This trend reflects also the existence of unintended negative consequences on the French film industry related to the French subsidy policy.

5.1. Revenues and Subsidies: A Negative Evolution

Figure 5 presents the average admission revenue of French films generated by one euro of subsidies--hereafter the impact ratio of French subsidies for domestic films (shown on the left vertical axis). Estimated in constant euros, French subsidies have increased threefold over the whole period while admission revenues have been almost constant. In other words, the average admission revenue of domestic films generated by one euro of subsidies has substantially declined over the whole period. This decline appeared in three very distinct periods: a sharp decline of this impact ratio from the mid-1970s to the mid-1990s, a slight improvement from the mid-1990s to the late-2000s, and a substantial decline since the late-2000s. More importantly, in recent years, the average impact ratio is close to one euro of admission revenues per one euro of subsidies--not a desirable situation. (43)

A similar observation can be undertaken with Korean subsidies. As expected, the average impact ratio of Korean subsidies in figure 5 (shown on the right vertical axis) also sharply declined when subsidies were massively increased in 2007. From the very early 2000s until 2006, it was in the range of 16-18 euros of revenues per one euro of subsidies. Since 2007, it has been roughly 5.4 euros of admission revenues per euro of subsidies. This decline reflects two mutually reinforcing forces. First and foremost, it is due to the very significant increase of Korean subsidies (denominator of the impact ratio) following the imposition of the seat tax in 2007. Second, it has been amplified by a short-term fall in 2007-2009 of Korean admission revenues (numerator of the impact ratio). (44) That said, it should be pointed out that the impact ratio of Korean subsidies has remained far above the French one in recent years. More importantly, the purpose of subsidies has changed in Korea. In earlier years, they were aimed at improving the infrastructure and R&D facilities that can benefit all film producers. (46) After the mid-2000s, subsidies have been increasingly distributed in the French way--directly to producers.

Finally, it is interesting to explore the impact ratio of French subsidies on the admission revenues of US films. Figure 5 provides two a priori unexpected observations since the late 1980s. First, the average impact ratio of French subsidies on domestic admissions for US films is much more stable over time than the one for French films, with the exception of the post-2008 decline that will be examined in the next subsection. Second, it is higher than the impact ratio of French subsidies for domestic films since the late 1980s. In other words, the case of diminishing returns is less pronounced for US films than for French ones--a sign of the unintended negative effects of French subsidies on the French film industry that are examined in more detail below.

5.2. Relative Prices: Hard to See but Having a Powerful Impact

An important decision factor for any moviegoer is ticket price. French movie theatres offer a wide range of admission prices. When a moviegoer decides, for example, between a US or French film, they compare the prices while taking into account the expected quality of the two films. If the admission price for a French film is lower than the admission price for a US one, they will watch the French one--assuming that the anticipated quality of the two films is the same. If the expected quality is different, then the moviegoer will be willing to pay some premium for a better quality film. In this context, the relative price between French and US films can provide very useful information.

What follows uses the average revenues per admission as proxies of the seat prices paid by moviegoers in French theatres. The relative ticket price for a French film rather than a US film is thus roughly estimated by the average admission revenues for domestic films divided by the average admission revenues for US films. Figure 6 shows a remarkable evolution of the relative ticket price for a French film compared to a US (or other foreign) one. In the early 1970s, tickets for French films were, on average, eight percent more expensive than for US films and 25 percent more expensive than for other non-US foreign films. However, a reversal of the situation is evident in the late 2000s. From this period, the price differential has gone in the opposite direction: tickets for French films have been, on average, eight and five percent less expensive than for US or other foreign films, respectively. Unfortunately, the same calculations are not possible for the Korean case because ticket prices for Korean and foreign films are the same for any given location; ticket prices vary only according to seat location in the theater. (48)

This relative price reversal confirms the existence of unintended negative effects from French subsidies on the French film industry. Explaining this reversal in detail is beyond the scope of this paper. What follows provides just three alternative or complementary explanations that should be explored in any future research.

First, such a relative price reversal could be interpreted as reflecting the expected quality of films. This would mean that, in the earlier decades covered, French films were perceived to be better than US films by the domestic audience, but that the converse perception has prevailed in recent years. Second, the relative price reversal could mirror pricing policies of movie theatres. For instance, movie theatres may feel the need to charge relatively lower prices for French films in order to attract a target audience, such as groups of students or members of certain associations. Lastly, movie theatres subjected to programming commitments may need to fill up their seats by discounting the prices for the films subjected to such requirements. Again, all these interpretations may be valid independently or jointly.

An important consequence of this relative price reversal is the need to adjust the raw data on admissions. The observed admission shares for French films in the late 2000s is likely to be boosted by increasingly cheaper prices, compared to prices for US or other foreign films. Assuming a (conservative) cross-price elasticity of 0.7 to 1.0 for films in movie theatres, the observed number of admissions for French films in the 2010s has been inflated by six to eight percent as a result of the recent pricing policy of cheaper French films in movie theatres. In other words, the adjusted admission share of French films--the one to be used for comparisons in the long run and for international comparison with countries without such a pricing policy--is roughly 35-36 percent, rather than 39 percent.

Conclusion

This paper compares the performance of a film industry benefiting from a massive subsidy policy (France) with one that has not enjoyed subsidies until relatively recently (Korea). This comparison is one of the first in-depth tests of the real impact of subsidies on film industries. The findings are quite surprising: a nonsubsidized industry can become as large as a subsidized one, and it can create domestic films as popular as those in a subsidized industry. Moreover, this paper reveals that subsidies have significant unintended negative consequences on the very film industries it seeks to support.

Not only do these results suggest caution in terms of public policy, but they also imply the need to shift focus to the role of private firms in the film industry. The Korean success story is largely due to the way in which it embraced internationalization, which forced Korean companies to adopt competitive business strategies with respect to foreign companies. This has been more favourable toward promoting and enhancing the quality of domestic films than protecting domestic producers from competition.

These results should be refined through further research in two directions. First, in several instances, this paper mentions the existence of good and bad subsidy policies. For instance, the Korean subsidies up to the mid-2000s were very limited, but they have focused on the infrastructure and facilities that could support all film producers in a rather non-discriminatory way, hence create healthy competition among domestic film producers and a prosperous film industry. There is thus a need to analyze and document these two kinds of subsidies in order to design the most suitable policy package.

Second, the histories of the French and Korean film policies have revealed the existence of political economy dynamics generated by film subsidy policies. Far from recognizing the success of its no- or limited-subsidy film policy and building upon them, Korea has recently followed the French path. It now faces similar drifts--renewal of the seat tax and extending support to build small movie theatres in remote rural areas. A better understanding of these dynamics would be an important contribution to the design of more efficient and accountable film policies for the benefit of a country's culture.

Sciences Po Paris, Paris, France

Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea, December 2016

PATRICK MESSERLIN is professor emeritus at Sciences Po Paris, France and Groupe d'Economie Mondiale (GEM). Email: patrick.messerlin@gmail.com

JIMMYN PARC is a visiting lecturer at Sciences Po Paris, France and a research associate at the EU Center, Graduate School of International Studies, Seoul National University. He is also a researcher at Groupe d'Economie Mondiale (GEM). Email: jimmynparc@gmail.com

Acknowledgement: This work was supported by the Laboratory Program for Korean Studies through the Ministry of Education of the Republic of Korea and the Korean Studies Promotion Service of the Academy of Korean Studies (AKS-2015-LAB-2250003).

An earlier version of this paper, prepared by Patrick Messerlin and Jimmyn Parc, was presented by Patrick Messerlin at the 5th Korean Screen Culture Conference, King's College London (June 3-4, 2016).

(1) See World Bank (http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL) for population; Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), Theatrical Market Statistics 2015 (Washington, DC: MPAA, 2016) for box office market size; and Korean Film Biz Zone (http://www.koreanfilm.or.kr/jsp/news/news.jsp?blbdComCd=601006&seq=3775&mode=VIEW) for admissions per person.

(2) Omar Lizardo, "Globalization and Culture: A Sociological Perspective," (working paper, Center for the Critical Study of Global Power and Politics, CSGP 07/8, Trent University, Peterborough, 2007), 27; Anjali Roy, The Magic of Bollywood: At Home and Abroad (New Delhi: SAGE Publications India, 2012), 101.

(3) Susan Hayward, French National Cinema, 2nd edition (London and New York: Routledge, 2005), 35-39.

(4) Patrick Messerlin and Jimmyn Parc, "The Effect of Screen Quotas and Subsidy Regime on Cultural Industries: A Case Study of French and Korean Film Industries," Journal of International Business and Economy 15, no. 2 (2014): 57-73.

(5) Cour des Comptes, "La Gestion et le Financement du Centre National du Cinema et de l'Image Animee (CNC): Exercices 2007 a 2011" [Management and financing of Centre National du Cinema et de l'Image Animee (CNC): years 2007 to 2011] (Paris: Cour des Comptes, August 2012), www.ccomptes.fr/content/download/49452/1363688/file/582_gestion_et_financement_Centre_national_cinema_et_image_animee_C NC.pdf.

(6) Jimmyn Parc, "An Eclectic Approach to Enhancing the Competitive Advantage of Nations: Analyzing the Success Factors of East Asian Economies with a Focus on the Development of South Korea" (PhD dissertation, Seoul National University and Universite Paris Sorbonne, 2014), 177.

(7) Kim Kyu-chan, "Munhwa kontench'u sanop chinhung chongch'aek ui sigibyol tuksong kwa songgwa: 1974-2011 munhwa yesan punsok ul chungsim uro" [Characteristics and achievements of the Korean government's cultural content industry policy: an analysis of the budget on cultural content between 1974 and 2011] (PhD dissertation, Seoul National University, 2012), 300; Kim Kyu-chan, "Han'guk munhwa kontench'u sanop chinhung chongch'aek ui naeyong kwa songgwa: 1974-2011 munhwa yesan punsok ul tonghan tongsijok kochal" [Characteristics and achievements of the Korean government's content industry policy: a longitudinal study of the cultural budget between 1974 and 2011], Ollon chongboyon'gu 50, no. 1 (2013): 276-317.

(8) For a detailed analysis of the Korean film policy, see Parc, "An Eclectic Approach"; and Jimmyn Parc, "The Effects of Protection in Cultural Industries: The Case of the Korean Film Policies," International Journal of Cultural Policy (January 2016), doi: 10.1080/10286632.2015.1116526: 13.

(9) Jonas M. Grant, "Jurassic Trade Dispute: The Exclusion of the Audiovisual Sector from the GATT," Indiana Law Journal 70, no. 4 (1994): 1333-1365; Craig R. Karpe, "European Cultural Protectionism and the Socioeconomic Forces that will Defeat It," Indiana International & Comparative Law Review 5, no. 2 (1995): 425-459; David H. Horowitz and Peter J. Davey, "Financing American Films at Home and Abroad," Columbia-VLS Journal of Law & the Art 20 (1996): 461-487; Judith B. Prowda, "US Dominance in the Marketplace of Culture and the French Cultural Exception," New York University Journal of International Law and Politics 29 (1996): 193-210; Joongi Kim, "Viability of Screen Quotas in Korea: The Cultural Exception under the International Trade Regime," Korean Journal of International and Comparative Law 26 (1998): 199-242; Carolyn Hyun-Kyung Kim, "Building the Korean Film Industry's Competitiveness: Abolish the Screen Quota and Subsidize the Film Industry," Pacific Rim Law & Policy Journal 9, no. 2 (2000): 353-378; Stephanie Peltier, "Les Industries Culturelles: Une Exception Economique?" [Cultural industries: an economic exception?], Cahiers Frangais 312 (January-February 2003): 31-36, http://www.ladocumentationfrancaise.fr/var/storage/libr is/3303330403129/3303330403129_EX.pdf; Gillian Doyle, "Audiovisual Services: International Trade and Cultural Policy," in Trade Policy in Asia: Higher Education and Media Services, eds. OECD and Asian Development Bank (Singapore: Asian Development Bank Institute, 2014), 301-335.

(10) Pierre-Jean Benghozi and Christian Delage, Une histoire Economique du cinema frangais, 18951995 : Regards franco-americains [Economic history of French cinema, 1895-1995 : Franco-American perspectives] (Paris: Harmattan, 1997); Susan Hayward, French National Cinema.

(11) Pak Song-chun, Yi Tok-chu, Yun Ha, and Kim T'ae-gu, "Kungnae yonghwa sanop e taehan yonghwa palchon kigum ui kyongjejok hyogwa punsok" [Economic effects of the film development fund on the domestic film industry] (paper presented at the annual spring meeting of the Korean Institute of Industrial Engineers, Busan, Korea, May 16-17, 2014).

(12) Jason Kornai, "The Soft Budget Constraint," Kyklos 39 (1986): 3-30.

(13) Michele Bagella and Leonardo Becchetti, "The Determinants of Motion Picture Box Office Performance: Evidence from Movies Produced in Italy," Journal of Cultural Economics 23, no. 4 (1999): 237-256.

(14) Christian Jansen, "The Performance of German Motion Pictures, Profits and Subsidies: Some Empirical Evidence," Journal of Cultural Economics 29, no. 3 (2005): 191-212.

(15) Parc, "The Effects of Protection."

(16) Robert Tannenwald, "State Film Subsidies: Not Much Bang for too Many Bucks," Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, 9 November 2010, http://www.cbpp.org/research/state-film-subsidies-notmuch-bang-for-too- many-bucks.

(17) Chi Myong-hyok, "Purangsu ui yonghwa chongch'aek e pich'uo pon kungnae ui yonghwa sanop" [Korean film industry viewed through French film policy], Purangsu munhwayesulyon'gu 20 (2007): 345-363.

(18) Kim Hyong-chu, "Han'guk kwa purangsu yonghwa sanop yon'gu: 2001-nyon-2005-nyon yangguk yonghwa sanop ui pigyo punsok ul chungsim uro" [Research on the Korean and French film industries: focusing on a comparative analysis of two countries from 2001 to 2005], Purangsu munhwa yesulyon'gu 22 (2007): 49-71.

(19) Parc, "The Effects of Protection".

(20) Hayward, French National Cinema, 26.

(21) CNC (Centre National du Cinema et de l'lmage Animee), Annual Bilans [Annual Reviews] (Paris: CNC, various issues); Hayward, French National Cinema, 17-75; Dimitri Vezyrouglou and Gael Peton, "La Politique Francaise du Cinema au Moment du Rattachement du Centre National de la Cinematographie au Ministere des Affaires Culturelles (1957-1962)" [French film policy when the National Center of Cinematography became part of the Ministry of Cultural Affairs], in Le Cinema: Une Affaire d'Etat (1945-1970) [Film: a state affair (1945-1970)], ed. Dimitri Vezyrouglou (Paris: La Documentation Francaise, 2014), 31-32; Parc, "An Eclectic Approach," 171-175.

(22) Pak Sung-hyon, "Taejung maech'e ui chongch'ijok kijehwa Han'guk yonghwa wa konjonsong koyang" [Political legitimacy and the production of wholesome movies in Korea, 1966-1979], Ollon kwa sahoe 13, no. 1 (2005): 46-74; Kwon Hyok-in and Yi Hyon-chong, "Yonghwa sanop palchon tangye rul patang uro pon munhwa kontench'u sanop ui chongbu kaeip kwa sanop songsukdo ui yongwansong" [How does government policy affect the entertainment industry? A case study of the Korean film history], Han'guk kontench'uhakhoe nonmunji 14, no. 7 (2014): 386-394; Parc, "The Effects of Protection."

(23) Parc, "The Effects of Protection," 7.

(24) In Korea, screen quotas guaranteed 146 days per year before July 2006; later it was reduced to 73 days per year after the signing of the Korea-US FTA. Regarding the market share of domestic films in Korea it was around 20 percent from the mid-1980s to mid-1990s. The market share increased in the late 1990s, however this is due to the function of private sectors in the Korean film industry (see Parc, "The Effects of Protection").

(25) Mediateur du Cinema, Rapport d'activitM 2014 [Activity report 2014] (Paris: CNC, 2015).

(26) Parc, "The Effects of Protection."

(27) For further information regarding US pressure and the French market demand, see Messerlin and Parc, "The Effect of Screen Quotas and Subsidy Regime."

(28) Vezyrouglou and Peton, "La Politique Francaise du Cinema," 31-32.

(29) CNC, Annual Bilans; Kim Kyu-chan, "Munhwa kontench'u sanop," 300; Kim Kyu-chan, "Han'guk munhwa kontench'u sanop chinhung chongch'aek ui," 288-305; Parc, "The Effects of Protection," 11-12.

(30) Patrick Messerlin, "The French Audiovisual Policy: An Evaluation," (GEM Working Paper, European Centre for International Political Economy, Brussels, July 2014), http://ecipe.org/publications/patrick- messerlin-french-audiovisual-policy-evaluation-english-version/.

(31) It is worth noting that the subsidies shown in figure 1 do not include those generated by an extremely favourable social security regime granted to a large number of part-time workers in the French cultural industries, known as intermittents du spectacle. The subsidy element of this special regime is estimated to amount to at least 200 million euros per year for the film industry alone (see Messerlin, "The French Audiovisual Policy: An Evaluation").

(32) Parc, "The Effects of Protection," 10-12.

(33) Parc, "The Effects of Protection," 9-10.

(34) Cour des Comptes, "La Gestion et le Financement."

(35) Pak, "Taejung maech'e ui"; Kwon and Yi, "Yonghwa sanop"; Parc, "The Effects of Protection."

(36) Parc, "An Eclectic Approach," 163.

(37) CNC, Annual Bilans; Parc, "An Eclectic Approach," 163; Parc, "The Effects of Protection," 6-9; Koreanfilm.org, http://www.koreanfilm.org; Korean Film Council (KOFIC), 1999-nyondo Hanguk yonghwa sanop hyonhwang [State of the Korean film industry for 1999] (Seoul: KOFIC, 23 August 2000); KOFIC, Hanguk yonghwa yon'gam [Korean cinema yearbook 2003] (Seoul: Communication Books, 2004); KOFIC, 2008-nyondo Hanguk yonghwa sanop kyolsan [2008 annual report] (Seoul: KOFIC, 2009); KOFIC, 2013-nyondo Hanguk yonghwa sanop kyolsan [2013 annual report] (Seoul: KOFIC, 2014).

(38) CNC 2013, "Tout ce que vous avez toujours voulu savoir sur le CNC ... sans jamais oser le demander" [Everything you always wanted to know about the CNC ... but were afraid to ask], May 2013, http://www.cnc.fr/c/document_library/get_file?uuid=1d6dec69-e723-435d-92c3bb49d79d90b4&groupId=18.

(39) Jimmyn Parc and Hwy-Chang Moon, "Korean Dramas and Films: Key Factors for their International Competitiveness," Asian Journal of Social Science 41, no. 2 (2013): 126-149, doi: 10.1163/15685314-12341295.

(40) CNC, Annual Bilans; Parc, "An Eclectic Approach," 163; Parc, "The Effects of Protection," 6-9; Koreanfilm.org, http://www.koreanfilm.org; KOFIC, "1999-nyondo"; KOFIC, Han'guk yonghwa; KOFIC, 2008-nyondo; KOFIC, 2013-nyondo.

(41) The France-Italy gap has slightly decreased over the period, but its evolution is very volatile.

(42) CNC, Annual Bilans.

(43) All the more because, as underlined in section 3, the general subsidy data used in this paper do not incorporate the massive subsidies associated with the intermittents du spectacle.

(44) Parc, "The Effects of Protection," 10.

(45) CNC, Annual Bilans; Parc, "An Eclectic Approach," 163; Parc, "The Effects of Protection," 6-9; Koreanfilm.org, http://www.koreanfilm.org; KOFIC, "1999-nyondo"; KOFIC, Han'gukyonghwa; KOFIC, 2008-nyondo; KOFIC, 2013-nyondo.

(46) Parc, "The Effects of Protection," 11.

(47) CNC, Annual Bilans.

(48) Recently, several movie theatres have introduced some luxury seats in theatres resulting in higher ticket prices. This is not related to the discrimination against the film's country of origin; thus, it is fundamentally different from the French case.

Caption: Figure 1 The Growth of Subsidies in France and Korea (1970-2014)

Sources: CNC (various issues) for France; Kim (2012, 2013) and Parc (2016) for Korea. (29)

Caption: Figure 2 Number of Films Produced and Average Audience per Film for France and Korea (1978-2014)

Note: Data can vary by source. Parc (2014) compared and collected accurate data among them. (36) Sources: CNC (various issues) for France; Parc (2014, 2016) for Korea (data are originally from Koreanfilm.org for 1978-2002, Korea Film Council [various issues] for 2003-2013; Admissions per capita of 1998 and 2008 are from KOFIC [various issues]) (37)

Caption: Figure 3 Relative Size and Admission Gap between France and Korea (1970-present)

Note: Data can vary by source. Parc (2014) compared and collected accurate data among them. Sources: CNC (various issues) for France; Parc (2014, 2016) for Korea (data are originally from Koreanfilm.org for 1978-2002, Korea Film Council [various issues] for 2003-2013; admissions per capita of 1998 and 2008 are from the KOFIC [various issues]). (40)

Caption: Figure 4 Admission gaps of France with Germany, Italy, and Spain (1978-2014)

Source: CNC (various issues). (42)

Caption: Figure 5 The Impact Ratios of French and Korean Subsidies (1970-2014)

Note: For the sake of more easily capturing the long-term evolution, the impact ratios for France are based on a two-year moving average. Sources: CNC (various issues) for France; Kim (2012) for Korea (data are originally from the Ministry of Culture and Tourism of the Republic of Korea [various issues]). (45)

Caption: Figure 6 Relative Ticket Prices for French, US, and Other Foreign Films (1970-2014)

Note: For the sake of more easily capturing the long-term evolution, the impact ratios are based on a two-year moving average. Source: CNC (various issues). (47)