Whatever Happened to Great Movie Music?": cinema verite and Hollywood film music of the early 1970s
In the early 1970s two well-known and well-respected film composers, Elmer Bernstein and David Raksin, wrote articles similar not only in their nearly identical titles, but in their assessment of a dramatic change that was taking over Hollywood film music. Bernstein's article, "Whatever Happened to Great Movie Music?," which appeared in a 1972 issue of High Fidelity, was the first to signal that all was not well in the film-music community. A profound change in film-music tastes and practices, he reported, was forcing many decorated and venerated Hollywood composers into an early and unwanted retirement. His services, and the services of colleagues like Alex North, Bernard Herrmann, Miklos Rosza, Alfred Newman, and Dimitri Tiomkin, were no longer being required because the long tradition of orchestral film music was fast being replaced by new musical forms and styles. That these new practices were decidedly inferior was an opinion Bernstein did little to hide.

   I find it inconceivable that this sophisticated art has in such a
   short time degenerated into a bleakness of various electronic
   noises and generally futile attempts to make the pop Top 40 charts.
   Today the trend is most obviously to the non-score, the pop song,
   and General Electric. It appears the king is dead and the court
   jester has been installed in his place. (1)
The traditional orchestral score was being unseated, according to Bernstein, by a number of popular music styles. "With the commercial bonanza of these 'pop sounds,'" he concluded, film music was being transformed "from a serious art into a pop art and more recently into pop garbage." (2)

In an article that appeared two years later entitled "What Ever Became

of Movie Music?" composer David Raksin confirmed that a dramatic change was continuing to reshape the sound and practice of film music. Where the original orchestral score once reigned supreme, Raksin also observed, pop and rock music were now dominating the musical landscape of contemporary films. While the inclusion of popular music itself, Raksin conceded, was not inappropriate to every film, the success that films featuring contemporary music enjoyed had led many directors and executives to use popular music excessively, some even exclusively. Because the "music of the young," as Raksin described it, is not

   appropriate to all of the aspects of human experience with which
   films are concerned, we must ask what it is doing on the
   soundtracks of pictures that deal with other times and generations,
   other lives.... It is one thing to appreciate the freshness and
   naivete of pop music and quite another to accept it as inevitable
   no matter what the subject at hand is--and still another to realize
   that the choice is often made for reasons that have little to do
   with the film itself. (3)
For both composers, the dramatic change in the style and sound of Hollywood film music was being fueled by a powerful extramusical and extrafilmic influence: commercialism. As they saw it, the change was being motivated almost exclusively by studio economics. By encouraging the use of pop and rock music in films, studios were reaping enormous profits not just from movie ticket sales but also from the sales of record albums that featured the new soundtracks. This new demand for pop and rock music, this change that was "strangling" the older generation of orchestral composers out of jobs in the early 1970s, was being driven, Bernstein concluded, almost exclusively by "the avarice of the producer." "Movie companies suddenly became music publishing houses and recording firms so as not to allow any of the loot to slip by them. And in the process the serious composition of thoughtful film scores was given short shrift." (4)

Raksin's conclusion was no different and no less disparaging. The sound of the film score was changing because a shift in the creative control of the music was taking place. "It should be news to no one that many people believe the Industry has been plundered," he observed, "ruined by incompetence and left to twist slowly in the wind by men whose principal interests--whatever they may be--do not lie in filmmaking." (5)

No doubt as a result of the invective these two composers used in describing the invasion of pop and rock music in early 1970s film music, their perspective was immediately echoed in the film and film-music literature. In his history of film published in the early seventies, Gerald Mast also noted the dramatic change sweeping over contemporary film music. "Gone is the old principle of studio scoring--to underscore a scene with music that increases the action's emotional impact without making the viewer aware of the music's existence. In new films there is little of this kind of background music." (6) While Mast describes the change only in general terms, however, film-music historian Roy Prendergast gave the new sound a more specific description. The change reshaping current film music, he asserted, was being brought about by a new set of pop music "conventions and cliches," a new practice "as stereotyped in manner as its Strauss-symphonic counterpart in the 1930s and 1940s--only that Strauss is now replaced by the pop, and the symphonic by the Fender bass." The new sound of film music, he continued, was shaped not only by unmusical executives but by directors, too, who "are as unaware as they always have been--perhaps even more so because of their youth--of the potential of music in films." (7) Composers and historians working in the 1970s, however, have not been the only ones to propose this assessment of film music. To a large degree, this theory--that film music of the early 1970s featured primarily pop music and that this shift in tastes was being motivated by the commercialization of film music--is one that has found a solid place in current film and film-music histories as well. (8)

More recently, several film historians have begun to see the early 1970s' fascination with pop and rock music not as the beginning but rather the middle of a long history of expanding studio commercialism, an expansion that was accelerated by the breakup of the studio system in the late 1940s. Jeff Smith, for instance, sees anticipations of the early 1970s pop-music phenomenon in the movie theme song bonanza of the 1950s, another change in film scoring practices that was heavily motivated by studio executives and marketing strategies. (9) Alexander Doty sees the changes in 1970s music practices as having roots in trends that were established in the 1950s. For Doty the popularization of film music started in the fifties with so-called teen-pics and Elvis Presley movies, films that were specifically aimed at exploiting the new musical tastes of the youth market. (10) The 1950s teen-pics and the later shift to pop and rock soundtracks in the seventies, he concludes, were both anticipations of a more sophisticated type of commercialization, a complicated "synergy" of film, television, and radio media marketing strategies by studio executives, which would govern the construction of many movie soundtracks and even film narratives in the 1980s. (11)

While the avarice of studio executives may have been the predominant motivation behind the dramatic shift in film-music tastes and practices in the early 1970s, it was not the only one. Many film directors, Smith suggests, also turned to popular music for purely aesthetic reasons. Popular music offered filmmakers a range of formal and allusive possibilities orchestral music could not. Where the classic Hollywood score was more likely to use music "as an element of structural and rhythmic continuity," Smith observes, filmmakers in the early seventies "frequently used songs as a way of establishing mood and setting, and as a commentary on the film's character's and action." Pop music was included because it could act as a "subcultural marker," he continues, as a "quick-and-dirty means of establishing or reinforcing traits of a character," something an original orchestral score, which aimed at a kind of universality, could not do. (12)

If commercialism was not the only motivating force at work behind the shift in musical tastes, then it is also worth noting that the popularity of using pop and rock music did not render the orchestral score entirely extinct as both Bernstein and Raksin suggested. Some of the most celebrated films of the early seventies, in fact, had original orchestral scores: Patton (1970, Jerry Goldsmith), The Godfather (1972, Nino Rota), Chinatown (1974, Goldsmith), and Jaws (1975, John Williams). Compared to popular films such as Easy Rider (1969), The Graduate (1969), Midnight Cowboy (1969), Zabriski Point (1970), Shaft (1971), Superfly (1972), The Last Picture Show (1971), American Graffiti (1973), and Mean Streets (1973), however--films whose soundtracks featured popular contemporary music from the likes of Steppenwolf, Jimi Hendrix, Simon and Garfunkel, the Grateful Dead, Pink Floyd, the Rolling Stones, and Isaac Hayes--the original orchestral score had little commercial power and did represent the minority sound of Hollywood film music.

I retrace the critical appraisal of the dramatic change that film music in the early 1970s witnessed not because I want to challenge or replace it. Certainly, commercial incentives and complex marketing strategies from studio executives were pressuring filmmakers to turn to popular and rock musicians and not venerated Hollywood composers for film music. And certainly, as Smith suggests, the inclusion of pop music was being inspired by important aesthetic considerations. Pop music gave filmmakers a greater range of allusive powers with which to shape a film's narrative structure. Rather, I revisit this period in film-music history because the dramatic change in music style has overshadowed the recognition of another equally important influence at work in early 1970s film music, an influence outside the mainstream of the Hollywood industry. The fact that the pop and rock music used in many of these films was also often presented as source music only, as music that is visualized on the screen and heard by the characters within the film, is evidence that the sound of early 1970s film music was also being reshaped by a separate concern. In the strikingly limited conceptual space in which much of this popular music is featured lurks the additional influence of a new aesthetic of realism. The dramatic change in the sound of film music was also being influenced by a new approach to musical realism, an approach that was first outlined in an experimental movement in documentary filmmaking in the 1960s. Certainly, music tastes and practices in the early 1970s were being shaped by commercial concerns, but they were also being shaped by an influential documentary film movement called cinema verite.

The Verite Revolution: A New Aesthetic of Musical Realism

In 1960 French filmmaker and anthropologist Jean Rouch introduced a film that in many ways helped trigger a revolution in documentary filmmaking. Entitled Chronicjiie d un Ete (Chronicle of a Summer), the film abandoned many of the traditional elements of documentary filmmaking in favor of a new, more oblique approach to documenting reality. Drawing from his anthropological background, Rouch's film consisted of a series of interviews in which he asked various Parisians if they were happy. The resulting conversations were not only spontaneous and unpredictable: many of them were also surprisingly revealing and highly personal. The camera, Rouch concluded, had the ability to act as a catalyst, as a means of provoking or stimulating his subjects into revealing things they would otherwise have not. It became a mirror, a window to an unseen interior of human behavior." (13)

If the look of Rouch's new documentary approach was striking, however, then so was the subtitle he gave the film: "un experience de cinema verite." (14) Behind the unusual fragmented and unscripted style, Rouch announced, was a new aesthetic of reality, an approach that sought to record reality directly and to achieve a greater sense of truthfulness or reality by capturing events as they spontaneously occurred. "Cinema verite," he stated, "means that we have wanted to eliminate fiction and get closer to real life." (15) Although the concept was new, the term cinema verite was not and was in fact one Rouch acknowledged borrowing from the Russian filmmaker Dziga Vertov. Cinema verite was a direct translation of "kino-pravda," a term Vertov had used nearly four decades earlier in a 1922 essay to describe a new vision he had for filmmaking, one that similarly rejected the theatricality and artifice of narrative film in favor of using the camera simply as a tool for observing and documenting reality. (16) The function of cinema, Vertov asserted, "is to photograph people ... with the camera-eye at a moment when they are not acting and letting the camera strip their thoughts bare." In describing his new approach to documentary filmmaking, however, Rouch did more than import Vertov s terminology. He revitalized many of Vertov's practices as well. (17) Like Vertov, Rouch, too, believed that the value of the camera was that it could strip away the layers of artifice that guard human action and behavior. Whether the ideal of cinematic "truth" was achievable or not, as Rouch's approach began to surface with increasing regularity, the term cineina verite began to exert a noticeable and visible influence over French documentary filmmaking in the 1960s. (18)

Interest in reevaluating the traditional approaches to documenting reality, however, was not limited to France. In the United States in the 1960s, a similar movement devoted to experimenting with more spontaneous methods of capturing reality was also underway, although American documentarians adopted a slightly different approach than that of their French counterparts. (19) Instead of using the camera, as Rouch had, to provoke or stimulate a realistic reaction from their subjects, the Americans--most of whom began as television journalists--advocated a quieter, more observational approach. Preferring to remove themselves from the filming process as much as possible, these filmmakers--including Robert Drew, Richard Leacock, D. A. Pennebaker, Fred Wiseman, and Albert and David Maysles--waited for a crisis or moment of tension to surface on its own without their stimulus. As one critic put it, "their rule [was] never to tamper, never to impose on what is before the camera, but to watch and wait and react freely, approaching the scene spontaneously without preconceived ideas." (20) While ultimately adhering to a similar aesthetic of recording reality in a spontaneous and uncontrolled manner, the philosophical differences, the preference for "observing" reality instead of ' arousing" it, made the American documentarians search for a different and more appropriate term for their approach. For this reason, many of the American verite-ists preferred the term direct cinema. (21) Because both camps of documentary filmmakers pursued in general a more spontaneous and less mediated approach to recording reality, however, the term cinema verite was adopted to some degree as an umbrella term to refer not just to the work of the French filmmakers but to the new documentary movement in the 1960s as a whole. (22)

The aesthetic of spontaneous and uncontrolled documentation, however, was not the only consideration that was giving shape to the cinema verite movement. A great deal of the verite-ists' stance was also being inspired by important technological developments being made in film equipment. Until the late 1950s filmmakers were hampered by heavy cameras, units that needed to be mounted on fixed tripods, and heavy sound equipment. A complex and often confusing myriad of connecting cables was required to synchronize them. While these limitations affected all filmmaking, they were particularly constraining to documentary crews. The weight and immobility of the equipment paralyzed documentarians both physically and aesthetically. Because the only events they could capture had to unfold in front of the tripod-fixed camera, reality often had to be directed or choreographed by the filmmaker. (23)

Over time, however, technological advances succeeded not only in miniaturizing both camera and sound units, but making them independent of one another. (24) The development of a new lightweight, portable, hand-held camera that was both quiet and easy to fix was followed quickly by the development of a portable magnetic tape recorder run by lightweight transistors instead of heavy vacuum tubes. These innovations had an enormous impact on documentary practices because they drastically reduced the weight and size of filmmaking equipment. Both camera and sound equipment went from weighing hundreds of pounds, in most cases, to less than twenty. (25) The miniaturization project likewise had a similar and striking effect on the number of technicians it took to operate each piece of equipment. In some instances, it reduced the filmmaking crew from dozens to a single person for each unit. Being able to independently synchronize both sound and camera without any constraining cords--an innovation that also came in the early 1960s--removed the final impediment to the verite-ists' ideal of capturing spontaneous and uncontrolled reality. These technological innovations were crucial to the verite-ists' mission not only because they allowed filmmakers greater mobility and flexibility in documenting reality, but also because they allowed filmmakers to enter the subject's world with a minimum of intrusion. (26)

The marriage of the new lightweight, portable equipment with the new verite aesthetic of uncontrolled and unmediated observation resulted in a number of striking and visible changes in the style of the new documentary. The most recognizable characteristic was the phenomenon of the "shaky" camera. As filmmakers moved, so did the camera, which, being no longer fixed or stabilized by a tripod, jiggled and shook with the filmmaker's movements. In pursuit of the new priority of mobility and spontaneity, in other words, many of the visible hallmarks of good filmmaking, elements such as framing, shot stability, clear focus, and exposure, were abandoned. As one of the American verite-ists explained it, this unusual visual look of the new documentary was not only unavoidable: it was necessary.

   There is a cinema verite technique which is the result of the way
   we are forced to work. We are attempting to capture what happens,
   to move with our characters without interfering in what they are
   doing. We are thus forced to use hand-held cameras and mobile sound
   equipment. Despite our best efforts the camera sometimes jiggles.
   This is the technique. It is not a form. (27)
Characteristics that were once considered inferior or thought to represent inexperienced filmmaking were now, on the contrary, seen to represent a new level of authenticity in documenting reality. The unstablized or unfocused camera, in particular, soon became not only a new measure of reality but also a literal symbol, a signature mark, of the new verite aesthetic.

The visual appearance of the new documentary was also affected by the complete or partial rejection of several traditional pre- and postproduction practices, the use of scripts, direction, and editing, especially. (28) Formal scripts and the kind of overt direction required to execute them were for the most part rejected outright as intrusive and manipulative. Both were thought to construct or create reality instead of observing it. Although editing film footage was still deemed necessary, the preference for an unmediated experience also severely curtailed the use of standard editing practices. In this regard most verite-ists adhered to strict guidelines allowing for cuts that affected the length and continuity of individual scenes without manipulating the film's content. (29) As a result, long continuous shots and jump cuts also became a standard part of the visual vocabulary of the verite film, new visual symbols of uncontrolled reality. By severely restricting or rejecting many traditional production and postproduction practices, the verite-ists redefined a host of untraditional and even "bad" film techniques as "realistic." (30)

If the new technology and aesthetic had a profound effect on the visualization of reality in documentary film in the early 1960s, it had an equally radical effect on the sound of reality. The aesthetic of uncontrolled visual observation was echoed in a similar mandate for uncontrolled or "observed" sound. Under this mandate, the soundtrack of the verite film consisted only of whatever was captured by the synchronized tape recorder. Just as the verite aesthetic required filmmakers to reevaluate the look of their documentaries, the corresponding aesthetic of verite sound required filmmakers to embrace a number of features previously considered unusable or undesirable. Bad sound techniques, too--garbled speech, lost words, distortions, interruptions, and long silences--became an accepted part of the soundscape of the verite film. (31)

Of all the revisions the verite-ists made to the concept of documentary sound, however, none was as audible as the absence of two postproduction favorites: narration and music. For the verite-ists, both narration and music represented precisely the kind of manipulation the new aesthetic hoped to avoid. These additives challenged the very notion of uncontrolled" cinema because they were not only extraneous to the reality observed, but also because they added a layer of commentary or explanation to the events being documented. As filmmaker Al Maysles explained it,

   What kind of realism can you achieve in a movie when you can't
   even hear anybody talking? ... Many people who have been
   making films within these last thirty years wouldn't have used
   synchronized sound anyway, even if they had it available to
   them. Instead they were, and are to this very day, using narration
   and music to such a degree that they, as many of them feel,
   are putting out illustrated lectures. (32)
Both narration and music destroyed the intended neutrality of the verite aesthetic because they emphasized the filmmaker's interpretation or perspective over the viewer's. Both additives interpreted the subject being documented instead of letting the subject speak for itself. If a fidelity to the mandate of uncontrolled or "observed" sound was to be maintained, the verite-ists asserted, then neither narration nor music could be part of the film.

In this list of rejected film additives, however, music seemed to pose a particularly difficult challenge to filmmakers both practically and conceptually. Verbally, some verite-ists rejected music completely. As Al Maysles articulated in the quotation above, adding music to a documentary was especially egregious because it was one of the quickest and easiest ways of destroying the perception of uncontrolled reality. Maysles' rejection of music was echoed by critics like David Denby, who in describing the new documentary films noted that they represented a new kind of "minimal cinema," precisely because they had, among other things, "no music." (33) In some ways, however, Maysles' and Denby's statements were more the exception than the rule because for most of the verite-ists, the rejection of music was simply implied. Most never mention music, even to dismiss it. For most verite filmmakers, music was simply not a conceptual part of their new standard of authenticity. The rejection of music under the verite aesthetic, in other words, was represented in both the filmmaker's and critic's discussion of the subject by almost complete silence. (34)

While in theory the rejection of music under the verite aesthetic appeared complete and comprehensive, in practice the use of music was much more complex. In fact, as several recent historians have suggested, the verite-ists' ban on music was really only partial. Not all music in verite documentaries was dismissed as manipulative and controlling, as Bill Nichols points out, just that music which was "external to the observed scene." (35) For Nichols, the verite-ists not only distinguished between types of music, internal and external as he describes it; their rejection of music really only extended to one type, to external or background music. Likewise, Steven Mamber, in his assessment of the verite-ist policy on music, also sees the ban on music as a partial one. The verite-ists didn't dismiss all music, he asserts, just music that stands outside the film's observed diegesis. If they rejected music, he argues, it was only nondiegetic music.

   The general absence in cinema verite of music employed for
   pointmaking is in keeping with the intention of leaving the
   material sufficiently open for many shades of interpretation. When
   it is used, the filmmaker is in essence rejecting the complexity of
   his own material. (36)
The verite-ists didn't reject all music, Mamber points out, just background music or "music for pointmaking." Only background or nondiegetic music was abandoned because it was the music that violated the practice of observed sound, the mandate for unmediated, live sound. Because nondiegetic music was music that was added in postproduction and was not heard by the subjects in the film, it was viewed as editorial commentary or interpretation. It manipulated the viewer into adopting a perspective that was external to the film.

Implied in this partial rejection of music, however, is an equally significant partial acceptance of music in the verite aesthetic. Although neither Nichols nor Mamber ever articulated this conclusion outright, implied in their more detailed understanding of verite music is the acceptance of diegetic music. By implication their more precise definition of verite music, one that excludes music external to the film, also includes music that is internal to the film. Music could indeed be part of a verite documentary if it was observed to be part of the film's live synchronized sound. The "partial rejection" theory implies, in other words, that if music occurred naturally and spontaneously within the frame imposed by the camera and sound equipment, if its source was visualized as part of the film's diegesis, then a verite film could have music. If nondiegetic music was unacceptable because of its unreal or mediating influence, then diegetic music was acceptable, and not necessarily because it couldn't comment on the events being filmed. Certainly, diegetic music, too, had extramusical abilities. But because its source could be visually observed within the film, those editorial capabilities could be more obviously confined to aspects of time and location instead of mood and emotion. The aesthetic of observed sound may certainly have resulted in the avoidance of music for pointmaking, but it also resulted in the inclusion of music. The verite policy toward music could also be more positively described as a mandate for "source music only." If the verite stance toward music can be redefined as a partial ban on music, in other words, then it can also be redefined as the pursuit of diegetic music, as the inclusion of music whose source is visually represented on screen.

While much has been said about the verite revolution in filmmaking, little has been said of the role music played in it. But of all the revisions the verite-ists pursued, the imposition of a "source music only" policy was not only one of the most striking: it was also one of the most profound. The characteristics of the shaky camera and of muddy sound were certainly striking, but they were also stylistic. The verite-ists' musical aesthetic, the policy of "source music only," was arguably even more dramatic because it introduced a conceptual change, a redefinition of filmic space. By accepting only music that was observed as part of the film's sound, by reducing all music to the aspect of sound, the verite-ists radically redefined the traditional spatial dimensions of the documentary film. (37)

Ironically, however, while the verite-ists' new policy of "source music only" seemed narrow and limiting, in practice it resulted in a surprisingly wide range of musical possibilities. At one end of the spectrum, especially in the political and journalistic "crisis" films made by Robert Drew, Richard Leacock, Al Maysles, D. A. Pennebaker, and others in the early 1960s, the mandate of observed sound and "source music only" did, in fact, result in films that literally had no music. In Robert Drew's 1963 film Crisis: Behind a Presidential Commitment, for instance, a documentary about John and Robert Kennedy's confrontation with Alabama governor George Wallace over the forced desegregation of the University of Alabama, there is no music. Music was simply not a part of the observed sound of the filmmaker's political subject. Considering the theoretical silence most of the verite filmmakers accorded music in the verbal or theoretical discussions of their methodology, however, it should perhaps come as no surprise that many of their films would express a similarly silent or musically austere soundtrack.

Musical silence, however, was not the only result possible under the verite-ist mandate of "source music only." The same policy of musical realism also resulted in the exact opposite, in a verite film full of music. In fact, the austerity of many early films may even have inspired some filmmakers to intentionally document musical subjects. Perhaps because the verite revolution also happened to coincide with a revolution in popular music, a common subgenre of verite documentaries that surfaced in the 1960s and early 1970s was the music documentary. The verite-ists captured the sights and sounds of many pop stars like the Beatles (What's Happening! The Beatles in the U.S.A., Al and David Maysles, 1964), the Rolling Stones (Gimme Shelter, Al and David Maysles, 1970), and Bob Dylan (Don't Look Back, D. A. Pennebaker, 1965). They also captured some of the most famous events in rock-and-roll history including the Monterey Pop Festival (Monterey Pop, D. A. Pennebaker, 1968) and Woodstock (Woodstock, Mike Wadleigh, 1970). Classical musicians, too, served as verite subjects. Richard Leacock looked inside the world of one of the century's greatest classical music composers, Igor Stravinsky (A Stravinsky Portrait, 1964), and Robert Drew examined the world of classical piano competitions (Susan Starr, 1962). While the concept of verite music could result in no music, depending on the subject matter, it could also result in the opposite. The "source music only" policy could also result in a film with wall-to-wall music.

Even if musicians were not part of the film's observational world, however, music in a verite documentary was still possible. In fact, the verite-ists' policy comes to the foreground more forcefully in those films that typically display music not as a result of live performance but from sources that feature recorded music. The Maysles brothers' 1968 verite masterpiece Salesman is a good example. The Maysles were famous for extending the boundaries of the direct cinema documentary to include not just political crises but personal crises as well. Salesman is a feature-length documentary that observes the lives of Bible salesmen, and, as the film progresses, the life of one salesman in particular, Paul Brennen. While the film has been described as having no music, there are, in fact, several crucial musical scenes. On one occasion, as Paul readies himself for a day of selling, he sings a fragment of "If I Were a Rich Man," a song from the musical Fiddler on the Roof, whose lyrics allude to Paul's own precarious economic predicament. On another occasion, however, music is heard to accompany Paul as he searches for a motel room at the end his daily routine. While driving through a neighborhood in Florida, Paul turns on the car radio and tunes into a station playing Woody Guthrie's "This Land Is Your Land." Although some additional allusive or interpretive power could be assigned to the text of this song (suggesting that there is something distinctly American in the quiet desperation of Paul's salesman's life), by emphasizing its place in the film's diegesis, by having it emanate from the car's radio, the music also gives the film a heightened sense of temporal reality. As the camera visually records the source of the music, the filmmaker's tape recorder captures the sonic reality of the subject's life in the static and interrupted soundbites that emerge from the radio as Paul tunes it from one station to another. Both in the visualization of the music and in the distortion and distance from which the music is heard, a sense of musical spontaneity or realism is created. In their quest to capture a sense of sonic reality, the musical moments in Salesman illustrate the conditions of verite music by assigning many familiar musical symbols the significance of "photographic truth." The significance of the verite-ists' "source music only" policy, in fact, is that it will reinvest a number of familiar screen images--radios, jukeboxes, record players, and dance bands--with a new kind of meaning, a new standard of musical authenticity.

If the cinema verite movement could be said to have triggered a kind of revolution in documenting reality on film, then certainly much of that revolution is represented in the way the verite-ists reenvisioned a whole host of filmmaking techniques. The new technology, especially, allowed them to pursue a new aesthetic of realism, a new representation of authenticity that resulted in a radically different-looking and sounding documentary film. But the new aesthetic also resulted in a unique understanding of music in film, one that reduced music to the dimension of sound. Because it addressed the more conceptual question of filmic dimensions, the definition of verite music in particular, the aesthetic of "source music only/' was one of the most formative and influential aspects of the verite revolution. While the verite-ists might not have been the first filmmakers ever to consider removing or reconceptualizing nondiegetic music, they were the first to put this aesthetic into practice with any kind of consistency. The real measure of the verite revolution, however, is reflected not just in the changes it brought to documentary film music in the 1960s and 1970s, but also in the degree to which its striking reconceptualization of musical realism, its source music only" policy, found a home in narrative film. The significant impact the verite revolution had on filmmaking as a whole can also be measured in the degree to which verite music can be heard in many Hollywood films from the early 1970s.

The Sound of Verite Music in Hollywood

If the technology and aesthetic of cinema verite triggered a kind of revolution in filmmaking, then nowhere was that change registered more clearly than in the speed with which many of its defining characteristics were absorbed into narrative filmmaking. As the verite-ists themselves noticed, aspects of their new techniques began to crop up in commercial films almost immediately. As early as 1964, for instance, Robert Drew observed that certain aspects of his groundbreaking 1960 documentary Primary attracted immediate attention not only from the documentary community but from the narrative filmmaking community as well. Especially in terms of the visual look of the film, the transfer seemed almost instantaneous.

   Within the next eight months, or a year, fiction films begin coming
   out of France using our techniques, as if it's good to have shaky
   cameras. We're trying our damndest to make the shaky camera
   smoother and over there they're making them shaky to look like us!
   So Breathless (1961) appears, and Tom Jones (1963), and a whole
   succession of films that are using our "look" to--I don't know, to
   gain authenticity, I guess. (38)
The influence of the verite aesthetic on narrative film, as Drew saw it, was both immediate and widespread, affecting the style of narrative films from the French New Wave to Hollywood. And, as his observations also emphasized, the influence, at least from his perspective, was primarily visual. Narrative film directors in the 1960s were not only importing the new technology of the handheld camera and independently synchronized sound, they were also absorbing the visual aesthetic that accompanied it. They were using verite camera and editing techniques to lend an air of observed reality not just to films with contemporary settings, but to films with a vast range of historical settings as well.

The connection Drew makes between the verite movement and French filmmaker Jean-Luc Godard, the director of Breathless, is particularly relevant. Godard, an important architect of French New Wave cinema, had strong ties to both the French and American cinema verite communities. Several of Godard's films from the 1960s and early 1970s echo the spontaneous and uncontrolled narrative structures of verite documentaries not only because of his interest in verite aesthetics: on several occasions he actually employed verite filmmakers Al Maysles and D. A. Pennebaker as cameramen. (39) The influence of cinema verite was significant enough, in fact, to shape both the unique style of his narrative films and his critical understanding of film history. The cinema, he once claimed, is "equally Eisenstein and Rouch; the most rigorous control and unlimited improvisation." (40)

Drew's reference to Tony Richardson's Oscar-winning film Tom Jones, too, is suggestive but also underscores the fact that in some cases the transfer of verite techniques and aesthetics to narrative film was only partial, in that some filmmakers absorbed the visual style of verite filmmaking but not its unique conceptualization of sound and music. Given the silence most verite-ists themselves displayed on the nature and placement of music in the verite documentary, however, it should come as no surprise that Drew would see the verite influences on Tom Jones but fail to hear the absence of any verite music practices. (41) In many Hollywood films, however, the importation of verite music is audible and just as striking and recognizable as the visual aspects of the verite style. As historian Gerald Mast observed, a new aesthetic of musical realism was surfacing in many Hollywood films in the early 1970s, an aesthetic that rejected traditional background scoring in favor of music that was visually observable. "If there is music [in these early seventies films]," he concluded, "it must be clearly motivated (i.e., playing on a radio or record player nearby)." (42)

While the importation of a new musical aesthetic of realism was observed from a critical perspective, however, few historians have measured its reach or weighed its significance, and fewer still have tied it specifically to the dramatic reconceptualization of realism that had taken place in documentary filmmaking. In a very audible way, the verite-ists' conceptualization of musical realism affected a wide range of films of the early 1970s, films as disparate in subject matter as Peter Bogdanovich's The Last Picture Show (1971), Martin Scorsese's Mean Streets (1973), George Lucas's American Graffiti (1973), and Sidney Lumet's Dog Day Afternoon (1975). What unites many of the these important films from the early 1970s, even more than a new realistic look, in fact, is a new realistic sound, the dramatic absence of nondiegetic music and the striking imposition of the verite-ists' mandate of "source music only."

As it had in verite documentaries, the policy of "source music only" in Hollywood films also found a range of musical expression from silence to wall-to-wall music, all within the diegesis of the film. Sidney Lumet's Dog Day Afternoon (1975), for instance, reveals not only a faithful importation of the verite musical aesthetic but an extreme interpretation of it. To some degree, however, the austerity of the musical approach was also dictated by the film's subject matter. Dog Day Afternoon recreated the real-life story of a man who, with no previous experience of any kind in crime, tried to rob a bank to get money for his boyfriend's sex-change operation. Although Lumet indulges in some narrative film traditions--most notably a long opening credit sequence involving a pop song and a montage of images of contemporary New York City in 1975--because the film was trying to recreate a real-life event, it also adhered to many verite principles, the most striking of which is the absence of music. Apart from the 1971 Elton John song "Amoreen" that is heard during the opening credits, the body of the film itself has no music. When the song is revealed to be a frame for the film's action, when we hear it shift from the background to source music coming from the radio of the would-be bank robber's car as the narrative action of the film really begins, the acknowledgment of verite aesthetics is not only audible and visible, it is dramatically so. With the click of a car-radio knob, Lumet signals not only the end of the credit sequence, he also acknowledges the end of his use of conventional Hollywood musical style in the film. The click of the car radio signals the beginning of a film whose documentary intentions are revealed most prominently and audibly in a policy of "source music only."

Although he never referred to the verite movement by name, Lumet did admit that what was behind not only the resolution of the opening song to a car radio but also the complete absence of music from the film after that was a new aesthetic of realism. "If the first obligation of Dog Day Afternoon was to tell the audience that this event really happened," he said, "how could I justify music weaving in and out?" (43) Like his documentary counterparts, Lumet was not calling for the removal of all music, just that music which stood outside the diegesis of the film. He rejected nondiegetic music and the space that it occupies because its ability to comment on, to weave in and out of the film's diegetic action, was one of the most serious threats to establishing film realism. That his imposition of the verite-ist policy of "source music only" resulted in no music is extreme but not unprecedented. Much of the film's realism is encapsulated in the musical austerity it very audibly borrows from verite documentaries.

Dog Day Afternoon was not Lumet's only experiment with verite music. As witnessed in his approach to music in three other important films in the 1970s, music, or most notably the lack of it, continued to play a pivotal role in establishing film realism.

   The Hill was also done in a naturalistic style, so no score was
   used. In Network ... again, no score. Serpico shouldn't have had a
   score, but I put in fourteen minutes' worth to protect the picture
   and myself ... from Dino [de Laurentiis who was] threatening to
   take the picture to Italy, where I was sure a score would have been
   laid in like wall-to-wall carpet. (44)
Lumet's comments not only illuminate the significant role music played in his approach to realism, they very starkly contradict the observation that the most profound influence working on film music in the 1970s was commercialism. What Lumet was resisting in those films in which he was pursuing a realistic or "naturalistic" style was not the pressure to include pop music. He was resisting the nondiegetic dimension of background music altogether. He didn't want a musical score, orchestral or pop, because it would destroy the new sense of realism he was trying to establish. Lumet confirms that one of the biggest threats to the Hollywood score was not the commercialization of film music; it was the "verite-zation" of film music. The silence in his films was not no music, it was verite music.

A similar reduction of filmic dimensions, although to an entirely different end, is evident in the music of another important film of the 1970s, Peter Bogdanovich's The Last Picture Show (1971). Like Lumet, Bogdanovich saw music as a key ingredient in establishing film realism. On the surface, this film, which is full of music, would seem to have little in common with Lumet's "silent" brand of verite music. In reality, however, Bogdanovich's and Lumet's approaches to music are different only in their subject matter. Behind The Last Picture Show, too, is a strict verite policy of "source music only."

To recreate the reality of the small Texas town in the 1950s described in Larry McMurty's novel of the same name, Bogdanovich used traditional narrative techniques of evoking historical authenticity--sets and costumes, for instance. But it is also clear that from the beginning his approach to film realism extended beyond the conventions that previously existed. "Anybody can get the right clothes and the right cars and so on; it's a question of the characters; they must exist in that period because they have to. Then the period becomes another character in the story." (45) In Bogdanovich's expanded sense of realism, in fact, several critics have observed a loyalty not just to 1950s culture but also to 1970s realism. The film may recreate a past time period, but the way that Bogdanovich presents that period is strictly contemporary. As Vittorio Giacci put it:

   That the picture has of necessity to be viewed from the perspective
   of the 1970s (it was not intended to be taken as a film of but
   rather about the 1950s) is unavoidable, considering that,
   obviously, it was not made in the 1950s but rather in 1970s, and by
   a director who was then only 31 years of age. (46)
In the filmmaker's approach to his subject matter is the more specific and the more contemporary presence of cinema verite. In addition to shooting The Last Picture Show in black and white, Bogdanovich let many of the film's scenes play out in long, unedited shots. Although he did not subscribe to the signature "shaky camera" phenomenon, his simple camera technique was interpreted by several critics as having documentary-like intentions. (47) His substitution of Hollywood's idealized picture of the West for a bleak, decaying, even nostalgic picture of rural life was also seen to be ultimately closer in nature to 1970s verite than 1950s realism. (48)

While much has been said about the visual duality at work in The Last Picture Show, few have described a similar duality being played out in the film's music. The music, too, however, reinforces the musical sensibilities of two different time periods. On one level, all the music that is heard in the film would have been heard in Texas in the 1950s. Bogdanovich carefully researched pop-chart archives and radio-station playlists to find out exactly what artists and songs people in a midland Texas oil town would have been listening to in 1951. While Sonny and Duane, the town's working-class oil "roughnecks," listen almost exclusively to the country music of Hank Williams, Lefty Frizzell, and Bob Wills and the Texas Playboys, for instance, the object of their attention, the wealthy, gentrified Jacy listens to the smooth ballads of Tony Bennett and Eddie Fisher. As the result of his research, Bogdanovich compiled a list of over 200 specific songs, top hits from the early 1950s that the film's characters would have listened to and inserted them into the film at appropriate moments in the narrative. (49)

In carefully engineering specific song texts to elide with specific events in the film, Bogdanovich also drew on musical sensibilities more closely affiliated with 1950s filmmaking practices. As several historians have observed, throughout the film Bogdanovich clearly uses song lyrics to both parallel and counterpoint the emotions, actions, and relationships of the character on the screen. (50) The film opens, for instance, with the Hank Williams song "Why Don't You Love Me (Like You Used to Do)" playing from Sonny's car radio, the lyrics of which foreshadow the outcome of Sonny's and Duane's failed relationships that are central to the film's narrative structure. In other instances, a character's true intentions are revealed in the lyrics of the song he or she is listening to. After flirting with Duane and toying with his affections, for instance, Jacy is seen in her bedroom listening to Tony Bennett's version of Hank Williams' "Cold, Cold Heart." The song's repeated refrain, "Why can't I free your doubtful mind and melt your cold, cold heart," underscores Jacy's insincerity and foreshadows her eventual rejection of Duane. Important plot points, too, are seemingly revealed or completed by song lyrics. When Jacy and Duane first meet at a local motel for a long-planned sexual encounter, Duane's impotence or lack of sexual presence is anticipated by the refrain of the Eddie Fisher song "Wish You Were Here" heard emanating from the motel radio when he first enters the room. When Jacy coolly breaks up with Duane shortly after their second and more successful rendezvous, and Duane is seen hurling cue balls against the wall of the pool hall, we understand his actions to be fueled not only by anger but by his continued feelings for her, as explained by the refrain of the Lefty Frizzell song "Give Me More, More, More of Your Kisses" playing from the pool-hall radio.

At the same time that Bogdanovich displays a stylistic allegiance to the music of the 1950s, however, he also displays an adherence to a more contemporary or verite conceptualization of musical realism. In addition to recreating "what" music would have been heard in 1951, Bogdanovich also carefully documents "how" it would have been heard, and in doing so he faithfully imports the verite mandate of "source music only." All the music in the film spills out of visualized sources--radios, jukeboxes, record players, and even live performing ensembles. All of the music in the film is given careful visual representation on the screen. Bogdanovich also recreates the distortions and interruptions that accompany the visualized sources. In the opening sequence of the film, the music on the truck radio, for instance, sputters and hiccups with the truck engine as Sonny struggles to get it started; moments later it cuts off suddenly with the engine as Sonny walks from his truck to the pool hall. The visual reality of the live country-western band playing at a Christmas dance is underscored by a change of volume that attends the music. When Sonny and Ruth Popper, the coach's wife, talk awkwardly at the dance the music intrudes; outside when Jacy and Lester talk, the music is appropriately muted. When Duane and Jacy later break up on the telephone, the music playing in the background from radios and record players in each location is carefully controlled in volume and paced to underscore its diegetic existence. For the music featured from radio sources, Bogdanovich even scripted and voiced-over the disc jockey's improvised radio banter heard between songs. (51)

While the music in The Last Picture Show has received some critical attention, the severity of it, the fact that it exists entirely within the film's diegesis, has not. In his history of film music, Jeff Smith, for instance, sees this film as participating in a larger campaign to replace the limitations of orchestral music with more richly allusive popular music. (52) Others have hinted that the visual and musical sensibilities in both The Last Picture Show and in another of his period or "nostalgia" films--Paper Moon (1973)--can be traced to Bogdanovich's admiration for the legendary Hollywood director John Ford. (53) Immediately before The Last Picture Show, Bogdanovich made a documentary film about his idol entitled Directed by John Ford. While Ford's films, particularly the later westerns, may indeed have influenced Bogdanovich's visualization of Texas in the 1950s, his musical sensibilities are distinctly different. That Ford almost never varied from using orchestral, nondiegetic musical scores to accompany his films suggests that Bogdanovich's more severe musical style, his "source music only" aesthetic, had different and more contemporary roots. The style of the music in The Last Picture Show may represent Texas in the 1950s, and even some Hollywood films from the 1950s, but Bogdanovich's conceptualization of it, the fact that it is presented entirely as diegetic music, is the sound of verite music in Hollywood.

Many of the so-called nostalgia pictures of the early 1970s, in fact, exhibit this new verite brand of musical realism, or at least parts of it. Some films, like The Great Gatsby (1974) and They Shoot Horses, Don't They (1974), featured a mixture of period and newly composed music. But even in these hybrid soundtracks, the fact that much of the music is given visible representation, the fact that much of it is featured as part of the film's diegesis, speaks of an acknowledgment of verite sensibilities. (54) In many ways, however, the more faithful interpretation of the verite mandate for "source music only" was found in those films like The Last Picture Show where the musical sources prominently represented on the screen featured "canned" or prerecorded music. Another such "period" or nostalgia film where verite jukeboxes and car radios play a pivotal role not only in the conceptualization of music but in the narrative structure of the film is George Lucas's American Graffiti (1973).

Although Lucas's film has an entirely different setting to Bogdanovich's--Modesto, California, in the 1960s--like The Last Picture Show, American Graffiti, too, is full of music. In fact, the film features so much music, Lucas himself originally referred to it as a musical, albeit an atypical one. "It has singing and dancing," he observed, "but it is not a musical in the traditional sense because the characters in the film neither sing or dance." (55) Rather, it is a musical in the sense that from the beginning Lucas wanted the style and texts of specific songs to play an integral part in the film's narrative structure. In his attempt to recreate the culture of the period, Lucas, like Bogdanovich, focuses as much attention on documenting the period sonically as he does visually. Along with hot rods, pompadours, bobby socks, and drive-ins, Lucas stocks the film with the sound of early rock-and-roll hits from such artists as Bill Haley and the Comets, Chuck Berry, Johnny Burnette, Buddy Holly, the Big Bopper, Del Shannon, Mark Dinning, the Platters, and the Five Satins. (56)

That Lucas had planned from the outset to use music not only to reinforce the film's location but also to comment on the relationships and actions of the characters in the film has been well documented in the literature. Smith, for instance, describes in admirable detail the extent to which Lucas used preexisting popular music to historically contextualize the action of the film and to open up a "vast associational network of spectatorial memory and affect." Like Bogdanovich, Lucas exploits musical style to delineate social class and characterize individual personalities. And he, too, carefully engineers specific song texts to coincide with and comment directly on certain actions on the screen. (57) Like The Last Picture Show, much of the impact of the music is also felt not just in the style of the music heard but also in its placement in the film. In American Graffiti all of the music is seen to emanate spontaneously and uncontrolled from visible sources on the screen. The reality of the music is anchored in the ubiquitous presence of jukeboxes, record players, and car radios. In recreating the look and sound of the 1960s, Lucas, too, recruits the verite mandate of "source music only." He invests the film with a sense of sonic realism by placing all the music in the diegetic space of the film. No music is heard in the film that is not also heard by its characters. In fact, the "observed" quality of the music plays just as important a part in the narrative structure of the film as does the ability of the text of that same music to editorialize or comment on the film's action. The conceptual realism of the music works to establish a sense of authenticity in a way that the song lyrics cannot. Where text and genre offer stylistic authenticity, for Lucas the policy of "source music only" offered conceptual authenticity. In American Graffiti, the ever-present car radio is more than a purveyor of pop styles and early rock-and-roll music. It is a symbol of the conceptual realism of verite music.

Although Lucas himself never overtly acknowledged the importation of verite aesthetics, the long history of the song selection process that took place during the making of American Graffiti reveals a glimpse of it. In early drafts of the screenplay Lucas called for the inclusion of eighty-eight specific songs. One of Universal Studio's greatest preproduction concerns was not only getting copyright clearance for all eighty-eight songs--which was necessary because Lucas planned to display them so prominently--but being able to afford that copyright clearance. When the studio's budget for song permissions proved limited, Lucas was forced to reduce the number of songs to forty-one and, on a number of occasions, to substitute several expensive songs with more affordable ones. For instance, an expensive Elvis Presley song was exchanged for a more reasonably priced Beach Boys song. (58) The revision process, however, revealed Lucas's understanding of the music in the film to be motivated by more than practical or stylistic concerns. As crucial as song styles and texts were to the plot of the film, they were also, on some level, completely insignificant.

   The most amazing thing we found was that we could take almost
   any song and put it on almost any scene and it would work.
   You'd put a song down on one scene, and you'd find all kinds
   of parallels. And you take another song and put it down there,
   and it would still seem as if the song had been written for that
   scene. All good rock and roll is classic teenage stuff, and all the
   scenes were such classic teenage scenes that they just sort of
   meshed, no matter how you threw them together. (59)
While the impact of certain song texts on the film's narrative structure was certainly meaningful, even hyperallusive, as Smith puts it, those connections were just as often, as Lucas himself admits, coincidental. More important than the style or text of the song itself, Lucas observes, was the act of putting that song "on the scene." That placement, that larger concern for revealing the music to be part of the diegesis of the film, superseded the impact of textual overlay. In Lucas's hierarchy of musical concerns, the conceptualization of music in terms of filmic space was more important than incorporation of music in terms of style and text. Where issues of musical style and text were negotiable, even interchangeable, the question of presenting or placing those styles and texts in the film as anything other than "observed" sound was not. Establishing suggestive parallels between song texts and the actions and events in the film relied on the believability that the characters in the film were hearing the songs. For Lucas, the allusive power of the music was predicated on the conceptualization of it as diegetic music only.

Historians have tended to place so-called nostalgia or period films like The Last Picture Show and American Graffiti in a separate category, in a group of works that were concertedly trying to avoid the gritty, anti-Vietnam War statements being made in films like Easy Rider (1969) and M*A*S*H (1970). (60) But to hear only the nostalgia in these films is to miss the verite in their music. While it is true that both Lucas and Bogdanovich distanced themselves from their contemporaries in terms of subject matter, even camera technique, their aesthetic of synchronized music, or "source music only," couldn't be more contemporary or verite. Both films have wall-to-wall music, but the fact that that carpet is laid not as background but as diegetic sound speaks of the tremendous influence the verite movement had not just on films with a contemporary setting, but in "historical" or "period" Hollywood films in the 1970s as well.

That this same verite conceptualization of music was informing those films with more contemporary settings, however, is evident in another important film from 1973, Martin Scorsese's Mean Streets. Like Lucas, Scorsese set his first Hollywood film in a place that was familiar to him, in his case New York's Little Italy, the predominantly Italian neighborhood in lower Manhattan where Scorsese spent his formative years. (61) If there is also a documentary quality to Mean Streets, however, it is not just because the film was highly autobiographical in nature. Scorsese, like Godard, had strong ties to the American documentary community in the late 1960s and early 1970s. During the lean postgraduate years that preceded his work on Mean Streets, Scorsese worked as an editor for the verite pioneers David and Al Maysles. He also worked as a cameraman and editor on Mike Wadleigh's high-profile documentary Woodstock (1970), a project that sharpened his interest in both documentary techniques and rock-and-roll music. (62) Shortly after finishing Woodstock, Scorsese shot his own documentary, Street Scenes (1970), a record of student protests against the U.S. invasion of Cambodia that resembled the early American verite "crisis" documentaries of Drew and Leacock in subject matter and technique.

Scorsese was also influenced early in his career by narrative filmmakers who had already begun to borrow from and experiment with verite techniques. In the early 1970s Scorsese worked as an editor for John Cassavetes. (63) A great exponent of aspects of the verite aesthetic in New York's underground filmmaking community, Cassavetes had a deep and mentoring affect on Scorsese's aesthetic sensibilities, introducing him to New York's experimental film community and to the films of the French New Wave, Godard and Truffaut especially. Scorsese credits Cassavetes with giving him an education in film history and with shaping much of his early style of filmmaking. "The beauty of it was that you had John Cassavetes making Shadows, which really made us believe if he could do that--pick up a camera and go out in the street--so could we." (64) Scorsese found the spontaneity and mobility of cinema verite, in other words, not only in documentary filmmaking and the work of the Maysles brothers, but in the work of narrative filmmakers like Cassavetes who were also employing verite techniques.

Considering Scorsese's early connections to both the documentary and experimental film communities in New York, it is perhaps not surprising that Mean Streets exhibits verite sensibilities on a number of different levels. While principal shooting was done on location in Los Angeles--rather than the real streets of lower Manhattan where the story takes place--the film still pursued many verite techniques, especially the signature shaky camera. Scorsese deliberately used handheld cameras and rapid oblique editing techniques in a number of pivotal scenes to convey not only a sense of immediacy but also "a sense of anxiety and urgency." Although he worked from a traditional script, some of the exchanges between the film's main characters were improvised, while others were improvised in rehearsal and then recorded and scripted into the screenplay. Scorsese, in fact, never hides the fact that he intended Mean Streets to be a kind of documentary. The film, he says, "was an attempt to put myself and my old friends on the screen, to show how we lived, what life was like in Little Italy. It was really an anthropological or sociological tract." (65) Critics, too, recognized the importation of documentary techniques in Scorsese's early narrative films. "Scorsese's contemporary 'street' films," Robert Kolker observed, "are fashioned by a tension between two opposing cinematic conventions, the documentary and the fictional." (66)

While the visual aspects of the film's documentary style have been analyzed, very little has been said about the documentary quality of the music in Mean Streets. (67) That the film indulges not only in a kind of visual anthropology but also in a kind of sonic ethnomusicology is evidenced in both the look and sound of the film. This film, like many of its contemporaries, is full of popular music, specifically the music Scorsese heard growing up in Little Italy. "For me," Scorsese says,

   Mean Streets had the best music because it was what I enjoyed and
   it was part of the way we lived. Suddenly a piece would come on and
   we'd stay with it for two or three minutes. Life would stop, so I
   wanted the film to stop and go with the music. Mean Streets has
   that quality, whether it's rock and roll, opera or Neapolitan love
   songs. In our neighborhood you'd hear rock 'n' roll playing in the
   little bars in the back of the tenement buildings at three in the
   morning, so that was "Be My Baby" when Harvey's [Keitel] head hits
   the pillow. For me, the whole movie was "Jumping Jack Flash" and
   "Be My Baby." (68)
While the popular music in Mean Streets evinces a greater stylistic range than its counterparts in The Last Picture Show or American Graffiti, it, too, plays a significant role in the narrative structure of the film. Scorsese uses the general aspects of musical style, for instance, to draw distinctions between the film's characters. In Mean Streets, however, the disparity of music styles is used not so much to draw social or political distinctions as it is to indicate generational ones. Where the older Italian mafiosos listen to opera and popular ballad singers, the younger generation of neighborhood punks, a group that includes the film's two main characters, Charlie (Harvey Keitel) and Johnny (Robert DeNiro), prefers to listen to contemporary rock-and-roll and Motown hits. Because this generational gap plays such an important role in the plot of the film, the soundtrack reveals a surprising and sometimes jarring disparity of musical styles--a range that stretches from the Rolling Stones, Eric Clapton, the Ronettes, and the Marvelettes, to opera arias by Mascagni and classic Neapolitan songs sung by operatic tenor Guiseppe de Stefano. While this stylistic conflict served a narrative purpose, for Scorsese it also had a strong autobiographical subtext. For him the stylistic disparity was a documentary necessity, a reflection of his own musical experiences.

   In many ways the main thing was the experience of music. I was
   living in a very crowded area where music would be playing
   constantly from various apartments across the street, from bars and
   candy stores. The radio was always on; a juke box would be playing
   out over the street; and in the tenement areas you'd hear opera
   from one room, Benny Goodman from another, and rock 'n roll from
   downstairs. I remember one time looking out of the window, a block
   away from a bar, seeing two bums staggering down Elizabeth Street,
   one so drunk the other's stealing his shoes, and while this fight
   was going on I could hear from somewhere "When My Dream Boat Comes
   Home" by Fats Domino. That's just how crazy this world actually
   was, and it made me think why don't they do that in films? (69)
Scorsese features a collision of musical styles in Mean Streets because he wanted to emphasize and communicate quickly the sharp contrast that exists between social and generational strata of life in Little Italy. He also recreates a disparity of styles because he wants the setting of his film to be as aurally authentic as possible.

While in general Scorsese tends to use music to emphasize the general location and mood of a scene more than he uses the text of individual songs to help shape the film's narrative structure, he is not averse to using music for such a purpose. When Charlie first enters Tony's, the neighborhood bar, for instance, the respect he commands in the neighborhood (as well as the insoluble ties he has with the local mafiosos) is suggested in the lyrics of the Rolling Stones song "Tell Me," and its refrain "You gotta tell me you're coming back to me," blaring from the jukebox. Similarly, when Jerry, a returning Vietnam vet, violently attacks an old girlfriend who is drunkenly dancing with someone else at his welcome home party, his actions are ironically counterpointed by the lyrics of Johnny Ace's soulful ballad "Pledging My Love," and the lyrics "I'll forever love you the rest of my days / I'm never far from you and your loving ways," playing from the bar's jukebox. (70) While the balance Scorsese tries to strike between documentary and narrative impulses is slightly different from that of his contemporaries, however, one aspect of his approach to musical realism is strikingly similar. He, too, defines musical realism not just in stylistic terms but, more significantly, in conceptual terms. All of the film's music is presented as having a diegetic or visualized source. In Mean Streets Scorsese also pursues a verite policy of "source music only." With all the distortion and interruptions that attend it, rock music and Neapolitan songs alike spill out of all the familiar verite symbols--jukeboxes, record players, and car radios.

However, while Scorsese features a broader array of verite techniques, a fuller range of both sonic and visual verite symbols than his contemporaries, his use of verite music in Mean Streets is curiously neither the most faithful nor the most literal. On several occasions the defining aspect of the new musical realism--its rejection of nondiegetic space--is, in fact, compromised. He allows the source music to bleed into what can only be the nondiegetic space of the film. Scorsese seems to extend the tension between narrative and documentary impulses, in other words, not only to aspects of musical style and textual interplay but also to the conceptualization of musical reality. Just as Lucas and Bogdanovich played with the textual and narrative implications of source music, Scorsese experimented with the music's conceptual or filmic space.

In the film's final scene, as Charlie and Theresa try to get Johnny out of town before the neighborhood Mafia bosses collect permanently on the debt Johnny owes them, the importation of the verite aesthetic is marked by the motion of the camera as it follows the car and by the observed sound of the car radio and the friends as they argue over what radio stations to listen to. Once again the celluloid car is the symbol of the importation of verite music. When the chase between the friends and the neighborhood thugs pursuing them begins in earnest, however, and as the camera moves to observe the chase from both cars as well as from a distance, the pop song being heard on the radio is neither muted nor distorted by the move. Instead, the music swells to occupy both the diegetic and nondiegetic space of the film. Scorsese turns up the volume of the music (the song "Mickey's Monkey" by the Miracles), temporarily abandoning verite realism by erasing the distinction between filmic dimensions. What started clearly as source music suddenly and purposefully becomes nondiegetic music. The intentional change in musical volume, however, doesn't negate musical space as much as it indicates a temporary blurring of filmic dimensions. When Johnny and Charlie's car ultimately crashes into a fire hydrant, that deliberate confusion of diegetic and nondiegetic space is brought to an abrupt end. As both the car and music abruptly stop, the "source music only" policy that was temporarily abandoned is once again restored.

While Scorsese's unconventional use of source music temporarily confuses the distinction between filmic dimensions, between diegetic and nondiegetic space, it doesn't reject the verite aesthetic of music. In fact, in many ways it is the clearest indication that the transfer of verite music to the Hollywood soundtrack has happened. By juxtaposing documentary and narrative musical traditions not only within the same film, but also within the same scene, Scorsese makes the importation of the new verite aesthetic of music that much more apparent. The moments of blurring make the imported quality of the new "source music only" policy stand out in greater relief. Scorsese's conscious expansion of the verite policy doesn't question its validity in narrative film. The contrast reinforces the importance of it in a way that the more literal interpretations, the nostalgia pictures of Lucas and Bogdanovich, could not. If, as Kolker observed, the tension between the narrative and documentary traditions is visibly manifest in many of Scorsese's films, then in Mean Streets we hear the audible manifestation of that tension. We hear, quite literally, the importation of verite musical practices to narrative film.

Several critics have tied Scorsese's unusual fascination with popular music to other trends that surfaced in the 1960s, specifically the work of experimental filmmaker Kenneth Anger and his avant-garde classic Scorpio Rising (1963). (71) The film--which was in and out of the courts on charges of obscenity because it mixed images of motorcycle culture with homoeroticism, sadism, and fascism--featured a soundtrack that consisted entirely of pop and rock music. While the imagery of the film was shocking, what made a deeper impression on Scorsese was Anger's soundtrack. "No one seemed to complain that he'd used all those incredible tracks of Elvis Presley, Ricky Nelson and the Rebels," he observed. (72) However influential Scorpio Rising's iconoclastic use of popular music might have been on Scorsese's early musical aesthetic, however, it fails to describe his use of popular music in one very significant way. In Scorpio Rising, Anger features the music only as an underscore, as nondiegetic music. In fact, in a complete reversal of the verite aesthetic, Scorpio Rising has no diegetic space. It has no dialogue or live sound effects but instead features sound and music much like a silent film. While Anger's film may indeed have inspired the use of rock and pop music in Mean Streets, and even the marriage of rock music with violent imagery, it could not have influenced the conceptual understanding of music that Scorsese's film displays. In the pronounced conceptual disparity of the music in the two films lurks an additional and equally significant influence. Anger may have encouraged Scorsese's fascination with pop and rock music, but the verite-ists inspired him to conceptualize that music primarily as an aspect of sound, as source music only.

Scorsese never labeled his particular fascination with popular music and his early tendency to feature it almost entirely as source music as specifically verite-ist. To some degree, however, just such a connection is implied not in the contemporary influences he often cited, but in the historical location he once gave his musical sensibilities.

   Popular music has the potential to give movies a forceful, dynamic
   edge. It doesn't have to serve simply as mood music or be an
   unimaginative device for establishing a time period. A striking
   early example of this is The Public Enemy (1931) where William
   Wellman uses popular tunes in the background played out against the
   chilling violence on screen, creating a sense of bitter irony and
   authenticity. (73)
It is not unusual that Scorsese should look to narrative film history for the source of much of his own musical sensibilities. Nor is it unusual that he would seek to find a precedent for his own approach to music in the work of an earlier Hollywood director. But that he should choose as his inspiration an early sound film, a film from the period when directors were also struggling to conceptualize music in terms of filmic dimensions, is significant. Certainly Scorsese shares with Wellman a visible fascination with the gangster violence and the power popular music has to counterpoint those images. But his appreciation of Wellman's musical style also conceals a more contemporary inspiration. In his admiration for an old narrative director who also conceptualized film music as source music only, Scorsese reveals his own verite roots.

Conclusion

That Hollywood film music in the early 1970s witnessed a profound change, dramatic enough to cause the displacement of many esteemed Hollywood composers, is an observation that has been documented by composers and critics alike. But the nature of that crisis has not been fully examined or appreciated. Certainly a new and emerging form of commercialism, the hyperintegrated form of movie marketing that would so dramatically reshape movie soundtracks in the 1980s, was beginning to motivate everyone from directors to movie executives to include more popular music in their films. And certainly, many filmmakers were incorporating popular music into their films not just for marketing purposes but for aesthetic reasons as well. Popular music was dominating film music because young filmmakers realized that it had a cultural immediacy and a range of associations that orchestral scores did not. It was the music they had grown up listening to, the music they knew and loved. In this striking stylistic change that Hollywood film music experienced in the early 1970s, the evidence of an additional and equally important change is both audible and visible. That many of these films were also displaying a profound reconceptualizing of film music is witnessed in the dramatic reimagining of musical space in Hollywood films of the early 1970s. Motivated by a new aesthetic of realism, these films reveal a preoccupation not only with the sound or style of film music but the placement of music within the film. It is a change punctuated by both the audible rejection of a thirty-five-year tradition of nondiegetic music, and the visual allegiance to a "source music only" policy. Because so many films of this period also display an intentional reduction of music to the diegetic space of film, the theory that commercialism was the only motive fueling the change in the sound of film music needs to be expanded. It has to recognize that the dramatic change film music experienced in the early 1970s was also being inspired by a distant cousin, the documentary films of the cinema verite movement.

NOTES

(1.) Elmer Bernstein, "Whatever Happened to Great Movie Music?," High Fidelity (July 1972): 55.

(2.) Ibid., 58.

(3.) David Raksin, "Whatever Became of Movie Music?," Film Music Notebook 1, no. 1 (Autumn 1974): 23.

(4.) Bernstein, "Whatever Happened to Great Movie Music?," 58.

(5.) Raksin, "Whatever Became of Movie Music?," 23.

(6.) Gerald Mast, A Short History of the Movies, 3rd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1971), 420.

(7.) Roy Prendergast, Film Music: A Neglected Art, 2nd ed. (New York: W. W. Norton, 1977), 167.

(8.) In his overview of film-music history, for instance, Tony Thomas states that "by the 1970s, the use of popular songs and rock music had become prevalent and, for the most part, inappropriate." See his Music for the Movies (Los Angeles: Silman-James Press, 1997), 268. And also Gary Mamorstein, "Threw a Party in the County Jail: The Rock 'n Roll Soundtrack," chap. 16 of his Hollywood Rhapsody: Movie Music and Its Makers, 1900-1975 (New York: Schirmer Books, 1997), 387-400.

(9.) Jeff Smith, The Sounds of Commerce: Marketing Popular Film Music (New York: Columbia University Press, 1998), especially chap. 2, "Banking on Film Music: Structural Interactions of the Film and Record Industries," and chap. 3, "Sharps, Flats and Dollar Signs." For a detailed discussion of the theme song phenomenon in particular, see 57-68.

(10.) Alexander Doty, "Music Sells Movies: (Re)New(ed) Conservatism in Film Marketing," Wide Angle 10, no. 2 (1988): 70-79. According to Doty, the pop soundtracks of the 1970s had their roots in the commercial success of the early rock 'n' roll "teen-pics" films like Elvis's Love Me Tender (1956) and Jailhouse Rock (1957). "By the early 1970s, Hollywood was committed to cultivating the youth market as perhaps the only secure share of an otherwise unstable and unpredictable audience, and the industry lavished what was left of its pre-release publicity ideas and dollars on this sure thing market" (p. 74). On this topic, see also Thomas Doherty, "Rock 'n' Roll Teenpics," chap. 4 of Teenagers and Teenpics: The ]uvenilization of American Movies in the 1950s (Boston: Unwin Hyman, 1988), 71-101.

(11.) Doty, "Music Sells Movies," 75-78. See also R. Serge Denisoff and George Plasketes, "Synergy in 1980s Film and Music," Film History 4, no. 3 (1990): 257-76.

(12.) Smith, Sounds of Commerce, 155, 164-65.

(13.) Quoted in M. Ali Issari, "Jean Rouch: The French School," chap. 9 of Cinema Verite (Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1971), 74. When Rouch's film first premiered in 1961, critic Peter Graham made a similar observation of Rouch's new method. He uses the camera, Graham noted, in hopes that "the bluntness of the question would provoke their subjects to reveal their inner preoccupations, their anxieties and their passions in the twitch of an eyelid, the fidgeting of a hand." See Graham's article, "Cinema Verite in France," in Film Quarterly 17, no. 4 (Summer 1964): 30.

(14.) At the start of the film itself, in fact, Rouch and his cameraman Edgar Morin discuss on camera the term cinema verite. On the significance of Rouch's statement of purpose, see Erik Barnouw, Documentary: A History of the Non-Fiction Film, 2d ed. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993), 253-62; Richard Barsam, Non-Fiction Film: A Critical History (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1992), 301-4; and Bill Nichols, Representing Reality: Issues and Concepts in Documentary (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1991), 44-56.

(15.) Issari, Cinema Verite, 22. See also "Jean Rouch," in G. Roy Levin's Documentary Explorations: 15 Interviews with Filmmakers (New York: Doubleday, 1971), 131-45.

(16.) "We protest against the mixing of the arts," Vertov asserted in describing his new "kino-pravda" method, "we are cleansing [the cinema] of foreign matter--of music, literature and theatre. We invite you to flee the sweet embraces of the romance, the poison of the psychological novel, the clutches of the theatre of adultery, to turn your back on music--to flee--out into the open ... in search of our own material, our meter and rhythm." See The Writings of Dziga Vertov, ed. Annette Michelson, trans. Kevin O'Brien (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984), 7.

(17.) Issari, Cinema Verite, 38-39. French filmmakers first became reacquainted with Vertov in the late 1940s when French historian George Sadoul made Vertov's theories available in French translation. See also Stephen Mamber, Cinema Verite in America: Studies in Uncontrolled Documentary (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1974), 6-9.

(18.) Aspects of Rouch's unusual style surfaced immediately in the work of other French documentarians including Mario Ruspoli, Chris Marker, and Pierre Perrault. See Issari, Cinema Verite, 107-14.

(19.) Mamber, Cinema Verite in America, 1-14. In addition to Vertov, the Americans were also influenced by the early American documentary filmmaker Robert Flaherty. In an early verite manifesto, however, Richard Leacock also cited another formative Russian influence--Tolstoy. See his article, "For an Uncontrolled Cinema," in Film Culture, nos. 22/23 (Summer 1961): 23-25.

(20.) Charles Reynolds, "Focus on Al Maysles," in The Documentary Tradition, ed. Lewis Jacobs, 2nd ed. (New York: W. W. Norton, 1979), 401. Maysles articulated his documentary philosophy in a similar way on yet another occasion. "Things as they come in real life are much more exciting than anything you could invent or stage. We observe and shoot things as they happen. The excitement comes from seeing something revealed before our own eyes." Quoted in Ellen Freyer, "Chronicle of a Summer--Ten Years After," in The Documentary Tradition, ed. Jacobs, 440.

(21.) As Albert Maysles put it, "If you have to use a label, I suppose 'direct cinema' is the one that's the most meaningful. What we're doing is direct in every way. We're not using scripts which frequently make for indirection. It's a kind of barrier. For us its another impediment between the moment that something is really happening in life and the moment that it gets recorded into film." See Maxine Haleff, "The Maysles Brothers and 'Direct Cinema/" Film Comment 2, no. 2 (1964): 22. The controversial use of the word "truth" (pravda and verite) forced many filmmakers to look for alternate terms to describe their approach. Leacock, for instance, preferred the term "living camera." See Issari, Cinema Verite, 17-18. See also Breitrose, "On the Search for the Real Nitty-Gritty: Problems and Possibilities in Cinema Verite," in Film Quarterly 17, no. 4 (Summer 1964): 36-40; and Brian Winston's essay, "Documentary: I Think We Are in Trouble," in New Challenges for Documentary, ed. Alan Rosenthal (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988), 21-33. Several documentary historians have described the difference between the French and American approaches as more than a terminological one. For Erik Barnouw, for instance, the terminological struggle revealed significant differences in methodology between the two groups. See his Documentary, 25455. Barsam also describes the American and French verite movements as fundamentally distinct. See Non-Fiction Film, 300-304. Bill Nichols also splits the verite-ists into two camps although not by nationality but by conceptual approach. See his Representing Reality, 38-56.

(22.) Several historians have argued against separating the filmmakers into opposing camps, preferring to see them as more united in approach than divided. As film historian Stephen Mamber sees it, the essential element in all cinema verite films is "the act of filming real people in uncontrolled situations." See Cinema Verite in America, 2-3. As early as 1964, Peter Graham, too, announced that all the new documentaries "have one thing in common. They all use reality as a means to various ends. That is to say, they are anti-fiction: they dispense with a scenario, actors and studio and use film of real people, actual events." Issari, too, makes a case for using the term cinema verite as an umbrella term. See his Cinema Verite, 19-33, as well as Lewis Jacobs's essay, "Documentary Becomes Engaged and Verite," in Documentary Tradition, 368-80.

(23.) For a good overview of the technical innovations that inspired the verite-ists, see Barsam's Non-Fiction Film, 302. He gives a concise account of the technical problems that plagued documentary filmmakers before the 1960s.

(24.) Ibid., 302-3. Barsam also credits World War II with helping to accelerate the development of film equipment innovations.

(25.) Issari, "Equipment," chap. 13 of Cinema Verite, 139-55. Issari, for instance, notes that after Rouch filmed Chronicle of a Summer using a 16mm Eclair NPR camera, which weighed around twenty pounds, that particular camera eventually became standard issue for the verite filmmaker. Likewise, the Nagra tape-recorder, which was introduced in 1958 and weighed just around fourteen pounds, became the sound equipment of choice for the verite-ists (144-45).

(26.) As early as 1966, Leacock observed the connection between technology and aesthetics when he noted that "we are working now with equipment which is sufficiently light to make it possible for us to record sound and image at the same time and it is portable. And no lights, no, tripods, to wires, no plugging in, you can film synchronous sound anywhere, any moment. It is this technical aspect that is the basis for a fundamental different approach to filming." See Jonas Mekas, "Gideon Bachman, Robert Drew, Richard Leacock, D. A. Pennabaker: The Frontiers of Realist Cinema," in Film: A Montage of Theories, ed. Richard Dyer McCann (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1966), 219. Al Maysles, too, credits technical innovations with facilitating the new approach. See Reynolds, "Focus on Al Maysles," 403-5.

(27.) James Lipscomb, "Correspondence and Controversy" column of Film Quarterly 18, no. 2 (Winter 1965): 62.

(28.) "In attempting to get at the truth of a situation, the preconceived script is disallowed, the filmmaker does not direct (in the sense of controlling what is in front of the camera), and the editing process is faithful to the actual event--its continuity, its relationships, its entire character." See Colin Young, "Cinema of Common Sense" Film Quarterly 17, no. 4 (Summer 1964): 26. Lipscomb, too, distills the verite revolution to the rejection of these three elements; see his "Comment and Controversy," 62. Others voiced concerns especially over the question of control and spontaneity. "I don't like the word 'director,'" Al Maysles asserted, for instance, "because I don't feel that the way I shoot that I'm directing anything." See Haleff, "The Maysles Brothers and 'Direct Cinema,"' 21.

(29.) While editing in general was drastically limited, some filmmakers, as Richard Leacock remembers it, experimented with rejecting it outright. "I met Al Maysles for the first time and he was like a maniac, a zealot; you shot, you couldn't touch or change anything, he wasn't any part of it because it was reality, he wasn't mucking around with it.... But I talked to him again a couple of months [later] and he's not quite so adamant about the purity of cinema verite. I think one of the things that made his Salesman good is the fact that they have edited it; even so, there are times when it's slow, but if it hadn't been edited.... I don't think it would have been as revealing." See Levin, "Richard Leacock," in Documentary Explorations, 203-4. Leacock would later go onto reveal a similar reductive inspiration behind the term filmmaker itself. "There will be no such things as cameramen; there will be filmmakers. There'll be no such thing as editors, there'll be filmmakers. It'll become an integrated process." Quoted in Issari, Cinema Verite, 26. For most of the verite-ists, the term "filmmaker" not only reflected the physical reduction of documentary crew to a single cameraman, sound technician, and editor, but indicated a new equality between them.

(30.) Other techniques were also rejected depending on the personal style of the filmmaker. Some pronounced explanatory titles acceptable because their intrusion was minimal, others rejected the long-standing tradition of interviews as manipulative. The Maysles brothers, for instance, avoided interviews. "We don't interview people. We feel it's an imposition of ourselves on people. If we start asking questions, they will answer according to our question, and I think it is exercising some kind of control over them." See Hamid Naficy, "Truthful Witness: An Interview with Albert Maysles" in Quarterly Review of Film Studies 6, no. 2 (Spring 1981): 167-68.

(31.) Barsam, Non-Fiction Film, 302; and also Nichols, Representing Reality, 38-56. As one of the few historians to focus on verite sound, Nichols sees both the "wildly gyrating cameras" and the "muddy sound" not only as aspects of verite aesthetics, but also as representations of the "voice" of the subject itself. See also his essay, "The Voice of the Documentary" in Rosenthal's New Challenges for Documentary, 52.

(32.) Quoted in Haleff, "The Maysles Brothers and 'Direct Cinema,'" 22.

(33.) David Denby, "Documenting America," in Documentary Tradition, ed. Jacobs, 477.

(34.) Neither Barnouw nor Barsam, authors of two of the most widely read documentary film histories, for instance, mention music at all in their discussions of the verite revolution. See Barnouw, Documentary, 229-62; and Barsam, Non-Fiction Film, 299-328.

(35.) Nichols, Representing Reality, 38.

(36.) Mamber, Cinema Verite in America, 229.

(37.) Although not identical, the collapse of filmic dimensions that the verite-ists instituted in the early 1960s is reminiscent in many ways of the initial conceptualization of music in the transition to sound film in the late 1920s. In early sound film, music was also literally and conceptually limited to the element of sound. Music had to be literally "visualized" or made real on screen in some way in order for it to be included in the film. As Max Steiner remembers, early sound film directors were afraid that if audiences couldn't see the source of the music on the screen--such as an orchestra, a strolling minstrel, or a record player--they would be confused as to where the music was coming from. In the transition years, roughly 1926-31, in other words, filmmakers also subscribed to a "source music only" policy. They, too, rejected nondiagetic music, although ultimately for different reasons. See Max Steiner, "Scoring the Film," in We Make the Movies, ed. Nancy Baumberg (New York: W. W. Norton, 1957), 216-38; and also Maurice Jaubert, "Music on the Screen," in Footnotes to the Film, ed. Charles Davy (New York: Arno Press, 1970), 101-15.

(38.) Quoted in P. J. O'Connell, Robert Drew and the Development of Cinema Verite in America (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1992), 71.

(39.) Godard frequently acknowledged his debt to verite filmmakers, especially American ones. He once called Al Maysles, in fact, the best cameraman working in the 1960s, which is why he hired Maysles to help construct a similar cinematic style in his narrative film Les Quartiers. See Haleff's "The Maysles Brothers and 'Direct Cinema,"' 2022; and Reynolds, "Focus on Al Maysles," 405. As late as 1969 Godard was continuing to work with American verite-ists. He hired Pennabaker and Leacock to work on his film One AM. See Levin, Documentary Explorations, 244-46.

(40.) "Jean Luc Godard's Half Truths," Film Quarterly, 17, no. 3 (Spring 1964): 6.

(41.) Tom Jones had a very un-verite, nondiegtic score, which won an Oscar for composer John Addison.

(42.) Mast, Short History of the Movies, 420. In his overview of film-music history, Prendergast, too, notes the emergence of a new musical realism in the early 1970s. He does so, however, only briefly (after quoting much of Raskin's "Whatever Became of Movie Music?") and only to dismiss it as a "regressive step backward." See his Film Music, 167.

(43.) Sidney Lumet, Making Movies (New York: Knopf, 1995), 178.

(44.) Ibid., 178-79.

(45.) Betty Denby, "An Interview with Peter Bogdanovich," Filmmakers Newsletter (June 1975): 78.

(46.) Thomas Harris, Bogdanovich's Last Picture Show (Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1990), 83.

(47.) Vittorio Giacci, Bogdanovich (Florence, Italy: La Nuova Italia, 1976), 48. Quoted in ibid., 85-86. As Giacci puts it, Bogdanovich's camera techniques reflect more of an attempt to record or document the events of the film rather than to moralize about them.

(48.) As Harris puts it, Bogdanovich's film visually "inverts" numerous traditional film Western motives. See Bogdanovich's Last Picture Show, 90-102.

(49.) Irene Atkins, Source Music in Motion Pictures (Madison, N.J.: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 1983), 52.

(50.) See Harris, Bogdanovich's Last Picture Show, 98-99; and also Atkins, Source Music in Motion Pictures, 51-54.

(51.) Ibid., 52.

(52.) Smith, Sounds of Commerce, 154-72. Smith also describes the music in this film as a kind of compilation score," the type of musical quilt of mostly preexisting music used routinely to accompany silent films. To refer to the music in The Last Picture Show as a compilation score, however, not only ignores the motivation of realism, it contradicts it. Especially given the fact that the compilation approach was the signature sound of a type of film not yet differentiated into diegetic and nondiegetic, such a label, while certainly applicable on some level, ultimately ignores the reductive stance, the purposefully limited filmic dimensions, Bogdanovich seems to be pursuing.

(53.) Harris, Bogdanovich's Last Picture Show, 68-78.

(54.) Atkins, Source Music in Motion Pictures, 61-73.

(55.) Dale Pollock, Sky walking: The Life and Films of George Lucas (New York: Harmony Books, 1983), 105. On another occasion, however, Lucas also likened the film to the rock 'n' roll teen-pics of the 1950s, saying that he originally intended to make "a Sam Katzman Picture," referring to the famous director of 1950s B-movies like Rock Around the Clock (109).

(56.) Lucas himself told a New York Times reporter that he had written the screenplay listening to the music of an old Wurlitzer jukebox. See Judy Klemensnid, "'Graffiti' Is the Story of His Life," New York Times, October 7, 1973, sec. 2, 1. On another occasion, however, Lucas also said the music came from his own record collection. See Stephen Farber, "George Lucas: The Stinky Kid Hits the Big Time," in George Lucas: Interviews, ed. Sally Kline (Jackson: University of Mississippi Press, 1999), 39.

(57.) Smith, Sounds of Commerce, 172-85. Smith gives an excellent and detailed overview not only of what specific songs Lucas uses in the movies, but how specific song texts articulate, emphasize, or counterpoint seen and unseen actions and emotions in the film. See also Atkins, Source Music in Motion Pictures, 55-57.

(58.) Farber, "George Lucas," 39-41; and also Pollock, Skywalking, 106-9.

(59.) Farber, "George Lucas," 40.

(60.) See, for instance, Harris, Bogdanovich's Last Picture Shows, 8. As Harris put it, Bogdanovich's nostalgia is the expression of "a resentment over the recent course of American filmmaking."

(61.) Les Keyser, Martin Scorsese (New York: Twayne Publishers, 1992), 20-25. In its original conception, Mean Streets was meant to be the last of a "Little Italy" trilogy, a series of films in which Scorsese intended to present the neighborhood of his youth with an unprecedented degree of realism.

(62.) Ibid., 19-20, 29-32.

(63.) David Thompson and Ian Christie, eds., Scorsese on Scorsese (London: Faber and Faber, 1996), 31. As Scorsese himself describes it, "I'd begged John Cassavetes, who had become a friend, to give me some work. He put me on Minnie and Moskowitz as a sound editor at $500 a week for doing nothing! I even lived on his set for a week and, when he required sound-effects for a fight, I held John while someone punched him."

(64.) Ibid., 14-15.

(65.) Ibid., 43, 47.

(66.) Robert Kolker, A Cinema of Loneliness, 3d ed. (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), 181. Kolker goes on to describe more specifically just how the two traditions surface in Scorsese's work. "The documentary by means of a free-moving, often handheld or, in the later films Steadicam camera that records people on the streets or talking informally in what appear to be actual rooms, offers an illusion of objective observation of characters, places, and events that might exist before and after the filming of them. The fictional creates a subjective point of view, coded so that the viewer understands that what is being seen has been created for the fictional moment as a controlled artifice." While Kolker identifies the "fictional" side of Scorsese's work more specifically as the influence of both Italian Neo-Realist and French New Wave filmmakers, however, he gives only fleeting reference to the specific documentary tradition visible in the film. Significantly, however, in some of the film's manner and structure he see the influence of the American verite-ists, David and Al Maysles (185).

(67.) Kolker, for instance, acknowledges that music is not part of the scope of his investigation, mostly because of "his own inadequacies," but also because film criticism has been "slow to develop an analytic vocabulary appropriate to the complexity of music's interaction with the narrative, or its function in helping to create the narrative." See ibid., 15.

(68.) Thompson and Christie, eds., Scorsese on Scorsese, 45.

(69.) Ibid., 28.

(70.) For a more detailed overview of individual songs used in Mean Streets, see Smith, Sounds of Commerce, 169-71; and also David Ehrenstein and Bill Reed, Rock on Film (New York: Delilah Books, 1982).

(71.) Smith, Sounds of Commerce, 159-61. Smith, for instance, sees Scorpio Rising as a "significant precursor to the compilation score" of the 1970s.

(72.) Thompson and Christie, eds., Scorsese on Scorsese, 21. "[Scorpio Rising] had been banned, but the shocking thing about it wasn't the Hell's Angels stuff, it was the use of music. This was music I knew, and we had always been told by our professors at NYU that we couldn't use it in student films because of copyright. Now here was Kenneth Anger's film in and out of the courts on obscenity charges, but no one seemed to be complaining that he'd used all those incredible tracks of Elvis Presley, Ricky Nelson and The Rebels. That gave me the idea to use whatever music I really needed."

(73.) See Scorsese's introduction to The Celluloid Jukebox: Popular Music and the Movies Since the 50s, ed. Jonathan Romney and Adrian Wootton (London: British Film Institute Publishing), 1.

Julie Hubbert is an assistant professor of music history at the University of South Carolina. Her book Celluloid Symphonies: 