Hinigeria's emergent video film industry
Filmmaking in Nigeria is currently overtaken by the phenomenon known as video film. Thematically bold, stylistically exuberant, and financially fulfilling for its practitioners, the industry did not, however, lack historical antecedents. This article draws attention to the historical context within which the video film industry emerged in Nigeria. It will examine the industry's modes of finance, production locations, target audience, marketing and distribution, narrative techniques, and key genres. But first, a quick glimpse into its historical origins.

NIGERIAN CINEMA BEFORE THE VIDEO FILM ERA

Like other modern media of mass communication and entertainment in Nigeria, film is essentially a colonial inheritance. Its advent in the country took two forms: independent commercial exhibitions and government sponsored productions. The activities of independent film exhibitors started as early as 1903 when Spanish and English merchants began to exhibit films regularly to fee paying audiences at the Old Captain Glover Memorial Hall in Lagos.
The British colonial government's involvement started in 1929 when it attempted to contain an outbreak of a plague within its Lagos Protectorate. The initiative to use film as a medium for public enlightenment on the vectors of the plague was the brainchild of William Sellers, the Chief Health Officer in the colonial government's Department of Health, and the experiment's success led the colonial administration to adopt film as a medium of instruction in what was then a largely illiterate society (Shaka 1994:230). Thereafter, in 1931, specially designed Mobile Cinema Vans were built to take instructional films to every nook and corner of the country thereby leading to the creation of what came to be popularly known as Mobile Film Units.

At the beginning of the Second World War, the British colonial government decided to establish a Colonial Film Unit (CFU) as part of its war efforts in the colonies. Emphasis however, shifted to the production and exhibition of instructional films after the war, and the Nigerian CFU unit was later renamed the Federal Film Unit (FFU) in 1946. This consolidation signaled the foundation of what was to become a full-fledged film industry in the country (Shaka 230-233). To train indigenous manpower for this sector of the economy, the colonial government in Nigeria sent Adamu Halilu, A. A. Fajemisin, J. A. Otigba and Malam Yakubu Aina for training at the Film Training School in Accra, Ghana. When this first generation of filmmakers returned from their training in Accra, they worked under the supervision of N. F. Spurr who was then the Chief Film Officer of the FFU. Some of the documentaries produced by the FFU in its days include Empire Day Celebrations in Nigeria (1948), Small Pox (1950), Leprosy (1950) Port Harcourt Municipal Council Elections (1950), and Queen Elizabeth II's Visit to Nigeria (1956) (Shaka 232-233).

The first generation filmmakers who trained in the Accra Film Training School were trained essentially as documentarists by the proteges of the School of Documentary of the Old Empire Marketing Board's Film Unit, which subsequently metamorphosed at the outset of the Second World War to the Colonial Film Unit. Adamu Halilu, the only filmmaker of note to emerge from the Accra Film School, started making feature films in the 1970s. Post-colonial film production in Nigeria began in the mid 1970s when filmmakers such as Ola Balogun, Eddy Ugbomah, Francis Oladele, Sanya Dosumu, and Jab Adu returned from Europe and North America where most of them studied film production. Their films included Amadi (Ola Balogun, 1975), the first film to be shot in an indigenous language, Igbo, in Nigeria, and Dinner with the Devil (Sanya Dosumu, 1975). It is also worth noting that both indigenous film production companies produced films--Ola Balogun's production company, Afrocult Films, produced Amadi while Starline Films produced Dinner with the Devil.

Before 1975, films with Nigerian themes and actors, and directed by foreign directors, had attracted negative reviews because Nigerian critics felt their narrative techniques lacked Nigerian flavors and were overly influenced by aesthetic preferences derived from the directors' societies. Such negative criticisms greeted Kongi's Harvest (1970) directed by the African-American, Ossie Davis, and, Bullfrog in the Sun (1971) directed by German director Hans Jurgen Pohland. A similar fate befell Lebanese sponsored productions such as Son of Africa (1971) and Golden Women (1971).

After the epoch-making efforts of 1975, movies produced and directed by Nigerians began to be regular fares on Nigerian screens, rising to a bumper harvest between 1975 and 1985. Within ten years, Nigerian filmmakers produced over fifty films, an average of four films per year, and most of them were well-received by Nigerian audiences who were dissatisfied by Hollywood Westerns/Action movies from the United States, Bollywood Melodramas from India, and Kung Fu films from Hong Kong.

A central figure in this decade-long upsurge in film production was Ola Balogun, who trained at the famous French Film Training School, Institut de Hautes Etudes Cinematographiques, Paris. In addition to feature films including Alpha (1974), Amadi (1975), Ajani Ogun (1976), Musik Man (1977), Black Goddess (1978), Cry Freedom (1981) and Money Power (1982), his major contribution was the facilitation of a film industry derived from the famous Yoruba Traveling Theatre companies, at a time when the influence of television and film was beginning to undermine their source of livelihood. Films he directed for the crossover companies of the Yoruba Traveling Theatre included Jaiyesimi (1979), Aiye (1979), Aropin N'tenia (1982), and Ayanmo, all of which were productions of Hubert Ogunde's stage classics. In addition, he directed Ija Ominira (1982) and Kadara/Destiny (1982) for Adeyemi Folayan (Ade Love Films), and Orun Mooru and Mosebolatan (1984/85) for Moses Olaiya Adejumo's production company, Alawada Films. Other notable directors of the historical period under consideration--that is 1975-1985--include the prolific and popular filmmaker, Eddy Ugbomah, whose production company, Edifosa Films, released The Rise and Fall of Dr. Oyenusi (1979), The Boy is Good (1979), The Mask (1979,) Oil Doom (1980,) Bolus '80 (1982), Vengience of the Cult (1982), and Death of a Black President (1983) (Shaka: 242-249). Within the same period pioneer filmmaker, Adamu Halilu, brought out films such as Shehu Umar (1976), Kanta of Kebbi (1977), and Moment of Truth (1978). Also, from the stable of Cineventure came Bisi, Daughter of the River (Jab Adu, 1977), which helped launch the acting career of Patricia Ebigwei, known internationally as Patti Boulay.

It is instructive to note that apart from the works of Adamu Halilu, the foregoing films were basically independent productions with little state or international film sponsorship. After then-President Ibrahim Babangida introduced the International Monetary Fund's Structural Adjustment Program (SAP) in 1985, independent filmmakers were squeezed out when the resultant economic downturn forced them to either fall back on their personal savings, borrow money from their relatives or friends, or mortgage family/personal properties in order to sponsor their films. Independent filmmakers had to contend with the problem of purchasing foreign currencies with which to buy raw stock, film production equipment, hiring essential technical crews, and post-production facilities. The devaluation of the Naira following the introduction of SAP made this impossible, and from 1985 onwards, film production has been a sporadic and occasional phenomenon in Nigeria. Such is the framework that makes us better appreciate the redeeming entrance of video films into the Nigerian entertainment scene.

A HISTORY OF THE VIDEO FILM INDUSTRY

Devaluating the Nigerian currency--the Naira--was one of the SAP's cardinal financial instruments, but even beforehand, the post-civil war years of the 1970s had witnessed a phenomenal rise in urban crime that significantly affected cinema theatre attendance. Secondly, most cinema theatres built in the 1960s had become dilapidated and generally regarded as dens of petty criminals by the 1970s a perception that kept many middle class families that emerged in the post-civil war decade of oil boom away from cinema theatres. Perhaps most significantly, though, by the 1970s television had taken a foothold as a prime medium of family entertainment. Television drama series such as Hotel de Jordan, The Village Headmaster, and The Masquerade were already household names.

To stay afloat, and to sustain their large families, the independent producers responded to the scarcity of foreign exchange in several ways. First, many fell back to their old production base of stage dramas or survived by selling video recorded copies of their stage productions, but when these did not fetch sufficient returns to stay afloat, many companies resorted to using corporate business bodies to finance television comedy series. The wealthier ones among them, such as Hubert Ogunde, took to co-productions with foreign producers, as was the case with Mister Johnson (Bruce Beresford, 1990). Those who went into corporate-financed television comedy series were soon faced with the advent of Nigerian television soap operas, which were equally competitive for corporate sponsorship.

Nigerians had become addicted to American television soaps such as Dynasty, Good Times, Dallas, The Cosby Show, and Christian soaps such as Another Life in the mid 1970s. By the mid 1980s, Nigerian soaps had equally started to grace the screen of the national television network. The experiment began with the highly rated Lola Fani-Kayode's Mirror in the Sun (1985), followed by Mabel Oboh's Victims (1988); Ripples (1988) created and directed by Zeb Ejiro; Behind the Clouds created and directed by Matt Dadzie; Supple Blues (1988) created by Paul Emeni and directed by John Ndanusa; and Checkmate (1991), created by Amaka Isaac and directed by Bolaji Dawodu. Others included Blossom (1991), created by Kenneth Amanze and directed by Danladi Bako; Fortune and Shadows created and directed by Dan Emeni, and the highly popular Basi and Company created by Ken Saro-Wiwa.

The Nigerian soaps initially competed favorably with imported Mexican soaps such as The Rich Also Cry, The Bold and the Beautiful, and The Lady of the Rose, before multi-national conglomerates such as Lever Brothers, UAC, AG Leventis began to discriminate against Nigerian soaps in corporate sponsorship. Notably, many of the directors and producers of television soaps of the mid 1980s and early 1990s such as Zeb Ejiro, Chico Ejiro, Amaka Igwe, and Bolaji Dawodu would later cross over into video film production in the 1990s.

A parallel development in the late 1980s and early 1990s was the evolvement of crude video film productions in Onitsha and Lagos. According to Israel Uge, an Igbo producer known as Solomon Eze, who had adopted the screen name Mike Oriehedinma, started the experiment between 1987 and 1988. His productions were not scripted, rather he devised scenarios/stories starring himself, which he also produced and directed. The video films, which were shot in series by Solomon Eze/Mike Oriehedinma, carried titles such as Ochoifekwu, Adeze, the Ola Nna series, the Onyemachi series, and the Ihe Ne Eme Na series. Most were shot with Camcorders and then transferred to VHS tapes, so the picture quality of these video films was poor, and they were more or less recordings of stage performances, lacking the usual nuances of filmic narration (Uge 1997: 53).

Experimentations in the Lagos axis are credited to one Babatunde Adelusi. According to Uge, Babatunde Adelusi's photoplay magazines inspired Ade Ajiboye (Big Abass) to produce Sonso Meji (1988), generally regarded as the first video film. Subsequently screened commercially at Tinuade Cinema, Oworonsoki, Lagos, Sonso Meji may have encouraged Muyideen Aromire to release his video film titled Ekun during an exhibition of video film equipment at the National Theatre, Iganmu, Lagos. Obirin Asiko, A)'o Ni O, and Sisi London, all of which were produced and directed by Aromire, immediately followed the film.

According to Uge, the commercial successes of these video films subsequently inspired others such as Gbenga Adewusi, Sunday Onuobolanle (Aluwe), the Ojo Ladipo Theatre led by Adebayo Salami, Jide Kosoko, and Kenneth Nnebue, to move into the uncharted waters of video films production. Jide Kosoko produced and directed Asirin Nla (1989) and Ako Productions released Asewo Te Re Mecca (1990), while Kenneth Nnebue directed for his production outfit, NEK Video Links, Aye Ni Iya Mi (1989), and Ine Ote (1990). Later, Kenneth Nnebue/Nek Video Links released the blockbuster, Living in Bondage (1992) firmly establishing the video film industry (Uge 54; Ayorinde and Okafor 1996:24).

Technically speaking, most of the video films of the late 1980s and early 1990s were of poor production quality. Most were hastily shot with VHS cameras, resulting in extreme depreciation and poor picture quality after editing, and camera and lighting crews were mostly amateurs. Since most of the directors' knowledge of screen narration was limited, the productions were extremely stagy, with the camera functioning purely as a photographic equipment, offering a peeping window onto the narrative world of the video films. The foregoing factors, coupled with limited production budgets resulted in poorly shot and edited video films. While these problems still persist in many of today's better financed video films shot with professional standard cameras such as Beta Cam, U-matic, Super VHS cameras, and lately, professional grade digital cameras, Nigerians' hunger for self-representation on screen ensures public patronage.

The video film industry is highly profitable. Jonathan Haynes and Onookome Okome have both cited the example of Okechukwu Ogunjiofor, who reportedly claimed that "with the N1,500 he had on him and a loan of N3,000, he immediately embarked on the shooting of Circle of Doom, from which he was able to buy a Benz and secure a comfortable home" (cited in Haynes and Okome 1997: 30). The case of Ogunjiofor is not exceptional. With little investments, producers rake in millions of Naira, with much of it going to the financiers/executive producers who are frequently spare auto parts dealers or electronic merchants in Idumota, Lagos, or at Onitsha Main Market, and who moved into the industry basically because of its high yielding profits.

Though professional hands such as producers, directors, actors, cinematographers, costumiers, camera men, editors, lights men, and make-up artists all complain they are short-changed by the merchants/executive producers, the fact remains that Nigerian actors and other screen related professionals have never had it so good. Video film stars such as Richard Mofe-Damijo, Ejike Asiegbu, Bob-Manuel Udokwu, Liz Benson, Sola Fosudo, Hilda Dokubo, Pete Edochie, Kanayo O. Kanayo, Sam Dede, Kate Henshaw, and others who have attained star status now demand over N100,000 per video film appearance (approximately $1,000). A super-star like Richard Mofe-Damijo goes for over N300,000 ($3,000) per film. (1) Though when converted into foreign currency, the amount demanded by the stars translates into a pittance, in the Nigerian context, these amounts compete favorably with those of workers in the highly paying oil sector.

While one can trace the advent of the video film industry to the post-SAP experimentation by artists and screen related professionals to entertain the Nigerian public, there is general agreement among film scholars that the most important event to firmly establish the video film industry in Nigeria are Kenneth Nnebue's video film blockbusters Living in Bondage I & II, both produced by his NEK Video Links Company. Shot in Igbo, and of superior technical quality, these films immediately became hits not only among Igbo speaking people but also among non-Igbo speaking Nigerians through versions subtitled in English.

The commercial success of Living in Bondage attracted a deluge of new entrants, both professionals and non-professionals, into the emergent video film industry. After Living in Bondage came Circle of Doom I & II (Okechukwu Ogunjiofor, 1993) also shot in Igbo with English subtitles--and then, out of a desire to reach out to a larger audience, Kenneth Nnebue released his next video film, Glamour Girls I & II (1994) in English, the release of which was heralded by wild publicity, including radio, television and billboard advertisements. The year 1994 also witnessed the release of Dan Oluigbo's Taboo I & II, Francis Agu's Jezebel I & II, Zeb Ejiro's Evil Passion, and Nneka: The Pretty Serpent I & II, with Part I directed by Zeb Ejiro and the Part II directed by Bolaji Dawodu.

The following year, 1995, was even better in terms of video film releases. They included Goodbye Tomorrow (Zeb Ejiro, 1995), Just a Night (Zeb Ejiro, 1995), Fatal Desire (Zeb Ejiro, 1995), Flesh and Blood (Chico Ejiro and Yussuf Lamson, 1995), Tears for Love (Chico Ejiro, 1995), Kenneth Nnebue's True Confession (1995), and, from Amaka Igwe's stable, Rattle Snake I & II (1995) and Adanma (1995) (Uge 54-61). Tunde Kelani, another trained cinematographer who joined the collection of producers, shot most of his films in Yoruba, including Kosegbe (1995), Ti Oluwa Nile (1995), and Ayo Ni Mole (1995).

Initially only few professional filmmakers thought the video format would succeed in Nigeria. Indeed, many thought video film production was a "flash in the pan," a passing phase that would quickly give way to a resurgence in film production. However, that has not been the case so far. Rather than being a mere survivalist and opportunistic endeavor, video film production has metamorphosed into a full-fledged, financially self-sustaining industry, offering employment to thousands of professionals, semi-professionals and amateurs alike. The industry currently has its own star system with the attendant glamour, soft-sell tabloids, and celebrity gossips, and keen competition amongst practitioners has resulted in the emergence of specialization in the various branches of filmmaking in the last few years.

One peculiar development within the video film practice is the emergence of genre-oriented productions. Films of the first genre, the "ritual" videos, attracted public outcry even as the executive producers smiled "straight to the bank" and those of another genre, "epics" include: Battle of Musanga (Bolaji Dawodu, 1996), Ikuku (Emeka Ani, 1996), Out of Cage (Ndubusi Okoh, 1999), Sango (Femi Lisade, 1999), King Jaja (Harry Agina, 1999), Red Machet (Zeb Ejiro, 2000), Iva (Izu Ojukwu, 2000), Gazulla (Jude Okoye. 2000), Abgbogidi (Darlington Nwaobosi, 2000), Ngene (Ndubusi Okoh, 2000), Ekulu (Ifeanyi Ikpoenyi, 2000), Akum (Andy Amenechi, 2000), Vuga (Simi Opeolu, 2000). Epic videos were followed by "Christian evangelical" video films such as Blood of Darkness (Andy Amenechi, 1996), Power to Bind (Teco Benson, 1998), Father Moses (Adim Williams, 1999), Above Death (Semisola Opeolu, 1999), Fast Money (Teco Benson, 2000), Mark of the Beast CAndy Amenechi, 2000), Testimony (Simisola Opeolu, 2000), Grace to Grass (Teco Benson, 2000), The Price (Teco Benson, 2000), End of the Wicked (Teco Benson, 2000), Holy Crime (Teco Benson, 2000), My Cross (Christian Onu, 2000), and Sisters on the Run (Chico Ejiro, 2000). These few samples of genre-oriented video film releases appeared as parts of "genre seasons" that can attract over a hundred thematically similar films, while rendering anything outside of the reigning genre a likely financial disaster. Currently, for instance, "campus stories" set in higher institutions and "vigilante films" are in vogue, but as the year 2002 marked a decade of success within the Nigerian video industry, there is no telling what subject will catch on next.

From its modest beginning, the industry has become a multi-billion Naira enterprise thereby making it a bona fide key sector of the Nigerian economy. Current estimates obtained from the National Film and Video Censorship Board (NFVCB), and reported by Tunde Okoli are as follows: From an estimated turnover of about N250 million in 1995, the industry currently has an estimated turnover of about N9 billion by mid-2001, covering production cost, equipment importation, leasing or rent, sales returns and profits, video club earnings, cinema and viewing centers takings, and exports (Okoli 2001: 46). Okoli also reports that Nigeria is presently the largest producer of video films in the world, producing an average of 650 annually (Okoli 46). This statistics makes the Nigerian video film industry the third largest in the world outside of Hollywood and the Indian Bollywood industry.

VIDEO FILM SPONSORSHIP, TARGET AUDIENCE, AND MODES OF DISTRIBUTION/MARKETING

A majority of the video films produced in Nigeria are sponsored by Igbo merchants dealing with electronic goods or spare motor parts at either Idumota Street, Lagos, or at Upper Iweka Road/Main Market at Onitsha. These merchant-executive producers also constitute the marketers, and by virtue of this fact, dictate the industry's direction. Since most of them are only semi-literate, they are not interested in upholding the principles underlying narrative techniques in film, nor are they interested in fine points such as the principle of verisimilitude or historical accuracy. They helped institute the star-system within the industry because their business sense told them that a tested product is more likely to move in the market faster than an untested new product, often insisting that some of the big names in the industry must appear in their productions, even if it meant cameo appearances. Similarly, irrespective of the aesthetic implications of their demands, producers are fond of insisting that their relatives and lovers be given some key roles even when they never auditioned.

Eddy Ugboma is a Nigerian filmmaker who thinks very little of the video film industry but nonetheless ventured into it for purposes of financial convenience and self-sustenance. When asked about the merchants/distributors' unprofessional attitudes, he said:

   The one I did recently is called Aba Women Riot
   but I couldn't get that one to sell like America or Die
   because the marketers who are now controlling the
   industry say that there was no violence and that it
   was not fetish. One said that because there was no
   computer or vanishing effect, it will be difficult to
   sell the movie. What vanishing effects do you want
   for a historical piece like Aba Women Riot. So I keep
   the movie because I am not going to digress to their
   standard because I want to shoot Izaga or Izizi or
   Iyege (Husseini 2001: 36-37).
Ugbomah's reference to Izaga, Izizi, and Iyege is a derogatory reference to the alliterate titles of many "ritual" and "epic" films, aside from which there is also the question of the obligatory special effects used in the so-called epics to make them sell. His observation also testifies to the stranglehold the merchant-marketers have on the video film industry. Whether self-financed or not, video filmmakers are subject to the aesthetic specifications of these powerful outside financiers.

This invariably brings us to the question of video films' imagined audience demographic. Going by the nature of obligatory special effects enforced by the merchant/marketers, it is clear that they have in their minds an imaginary lower working class/teenage urban target audience--the same types nurtured by Onitsha Market Literature with its romances, thrillers and melodramatic stories. In addition, one must add women to this group because of the romantic slant of most of the video narratives.

The working class, made up of low income bracket and semi-literate junior civil servants, traders, market women, and trades men such as mechanics, welders, electricians, plumbers, masons, and drivers, constitute the hooked and uncritical strata of the imaginary spectatorship constructed for these films, while the teenagers, especially those in schools, and the upper income bracket of the working class made up principally of senior civil servants, often constitute the critical arm of the target audience. Senior bureaucrats are most especially the ones who criticize the video films for their violence, superstition, and fetish preoccupations, but most all viewers are unaware of the way merchant-marketers impose effects and choice of stories on video film directors.

Most of the teenagers who are also hooked on the video films are also critical of some of the narrative techniques in the films because many of them are in school, and thus they easily see through several of the narrative contrivances in the films. A majority of the women viewers, however, are so hooked on the romantic angle of the stories, and the fantasy world of opulence represented in them, that they are prepared to overlook historical inaccuracies, inappropriate casting, and overall narrative sloppiness of the films. When these inadequacies are pointed out to them, they often remark that one was spoiling the fun by paying too much attention to the exigencies of narration at the expense of the rich narrative on offer to spectators.
With reference to class stratification and class tastes, the point needs to be made that in Nigeria, social classes are not so clearly defined as in Europe, the Americas, and parts of Asia. Though one may say that contractors, politicians, and managerial-level workers in the private and public sectors form part of what may be referred to as middle and upper middle classes respectively, the lack of savoir faire, refinement, and culture by the semi-literate members of these classes make class taste difficult to assess. Though the well-read and well-traveled members of these classes relate rather standoffishly toward Nigerian video films, being hooked on Hollywood movies which they readily have access to, the semi-literate members of these classes spend the little leisure time they can spare watching either national television network or watching Nigerian video films. Likewise, because of their semi-literate status, they are hardly critical of what is on offer in these video films.

With respect to distribution and marketing, the Igbo merchant-executive producers also constitute the distributors/marketers of the video films. Though they are mostly semi-literate persons (a few are now beginning to acquire university education due to societal stereotypes of their behaviors), they are nevertheless well schooled in international business, as importers and exporters of goods within the West African sub-region. As indefatigable traders, their activities cover the whole of Africa, and for these reasons, even though the video films are produced and packaged for the Nigerian market, the merchants/marketers have ensured they are available for Nigerians in diaspora, both in Europe and North America. They have equally tested their products in the sub-regional markets of West, East, and Southern Africa, and having discovered a demand for their video films, they have moved into these markets as well. As shrewd businessmen, though, they are quick to lament to the directors, actors and other professional workers in the industry, that only a few thousand copies of their films are sold. Even with the export trade angle, the marketers participate in piracy and explain it away to video producers. It is this financial underhandedness which underlies the relationship between the merchants/marketers and the video film professionals that form the source of disagreements in the industry and may yet be its undoing.

NARRATIVE TECHNIQUES OF THE NIGERIAN VIDEO FILM INDUSTRY

Rural-urban migratory patterns in developing societies and the narrative techniques of Nigerian television soap operas are two factors paramount to understanding narrative techniques in Nigerian video films. As a result of the structural patterns of rural-urban migration in Nigeria, one finds that the narrative patterns of the video films have been equally constrained to follow the same framework. The stories either begin in a rural setting/community and then move invariably into Lagos or may begin in Lagos and then end up with marital or burial ceremonies in a rural setting outside the city.

The opening sequences of most of the video films open with long aerial shots of either a rural setting or of the city of Lagos before there is a cut to the scene of narrative action. Whether the film is set principally in Lagos or not, when narrative action switches to the city, in keeping with the dictates of rural-urban migration patterns, the opening sequences of the Lagos aspect of the narrative is often heralded by breath-taking aerial shots of the sky scrapper dotted Marina water front of the city, accompanied with elevating theme music.

The breath-taking skyline deceptively romanticizes the city as a site of opulence, thereby effectively masking the spectator from the stark reality of the rot of urban decay, traffic holdups, the maddening crowd, and urban crimes which daily confront Lagosians--factors hardly adding up to the romanticized image of the city. Also, whether narrative action takes place in the day or in the night, this has been the standardized pattern for representing Lagos in the video films. Since the glamorization of Lagos was first started in Nigerian television soaps such as Mirror in the Sun, Checkmate, and Basi and Company, one could say that this pattern of representation is a carryover influence of the narrative techniques of Nigerian television soaps, brought to the video films by the producers and directors of these soaps who now constitute the bulk of directors in the new industry.

Another notable influence of Nigerian television soaps is the superfluous use of theme music (as opposed to musical score) in the video films. Here, music is not necessarily used to highlight mood, to anticipate narrative action, or to create suspense, rather most of it is placed almost randomly into the film, and consequently it tends to obstruct the flow of narrative action. Another quality is the under-exploration of the camera's full narrational range; often it remains too static. Further, the videographers seem content with the primitive photographic quality of the medium, and hence most of the video films appear stagy. One finds that apart from the usual narrative "point of view" which is contingent upon thematic preferences in the film, subjective points of view and the rich complexities they bring to narrative action are hardly explored. In the few cases where they are used, they are deployed through the agency of narrative flashback, hardly through the agency of the subjective point-of-view shot.

As earlier noted, attention is hardly paid to issues such as historical accuracy and the principle of verisimilitude. For instance, when the stories in most of the video films switch between 1930s and 1960s, one still finds cars of the 1990s zooming through the streets, and the fashion doesn't seem to also reflect changes in the historical periods covered by the narrative.

Characterization is also handled along the traditional lines of gender hierarchy in African society, such that the male always seems to be the subject in narrative with the female functioning as an object of male spectacle or vilification, serving more to be seen than heard. Where women are characterized as very loud and adventurous as in Glamour Girls (Kenneth Nnebue, 1993), the femme fatale image is made to read as a signifier for waywardness and promiscuity.

Most of the video films revolve around family melodramas in which female familial desires and pleasures are rendered as unattainable aspirations either as a result of the patriarchal structures of the society, the demands and institutional practices of modernity as played out in urban Nigeria, or the constant push and pull of traditional African institutional practices in relation to those of modernity or intra-female gender squabbles. Thus, in both domestic and public spheres, gender inequalities are constantly rehashed and played out without much room given to creative political projects of the sort that will help liberate the female gender. The production orientation and structures of the Nigerian video film industry are yet to be subjected to a radical politicization of the sort that will challenge old regimes of authority which negate the unhindered and unrestricted satisfaction of female gender desires and aspirations. In addition, female directors within the industry either seem unwilling to politicize the industry or are much more interested, like their male counterparts, in sustaining the myth of male superiority in keeping with the commercial orientation of the industry.

The video film industry is a source of popular entertainment in Nigeria, but for many years, not much attention was paid it until the release of Jonathan Haynes's book, Nigerian Video Films. Representing one of the many sites where the subjectivities and identities of modern Nigerians are constantly being creatively negotiated between the demands of traditional African institutional practices and those of modernity, the result is a hybridized subjectivity and identity, which defiles reduction to either tradition or modernity. This theoretical understanding seem to underline Karin Barber's arguments when she notes for instance that:

   What this binary paradigm has obscured is the
   cultural activities, procedures, and products of the
   majority of people in present-day Africa. There is a
   vast domain of cultural production which cannot be
   classified as either "traditional" or "elite," as "oral"
   or "literate," as "indigenous" or "Western" in inspiration,
   because it straddles and dissolves these distinctions
   (Barber 1997: 1-2).
There is also the need to understand the hitherto neglect of popular culture in Africa as a product of class distinction and politics. Most middle-class scholars seem too preoccupied with their own cultural bias to see anything creative or elevating in popular culture, and among them one can grasp their near prejudicial class bias towards Rap music and culture in America and elsewhere in the world where it is seen to be a bad influence on youths. Yet such biased evaluations overlook the fact that popular culture actually represents the cutting edge of identity formation and social transformation in most societies. Today, blinded by either generational or class tastes and aesthetic preferences, many are unable to recognize popular youth culture as the cutting edge of identity formation in their own societies. The truth however is that whether popular culture is sanctioned or not, it will continue to attract youths or poor urban dwellers whose source of entertainment derive from it, and in this sense, popular culture will continue to remain the most vibrant culture of any society.

Nigerian artists, media practitioners and filmmakers alike, are reinventing themselves through popular entertainment media like the video film industry. One only hopes that the video film industry that has flourished for close to a decade will help to kick-start the comatose Nigerian film industry.
