‘Girls don’t play soccer’: children policing gender on the playground in a township primary school in South Africa

ABSTRACT
This paper is based on an ethnographic study conducted between 2012 and 2014 with a group of 64 boys and girls aged 6–10, all attending the same township primary school in South Africa. The paper explores how the young children construct gender ‘boundaries’ and ‘police’ gender ‘transgressions’ on the school playground during break-time. The findings illustrate the ways in which these young boys and girls learn to ‘do’ gender through practices of inclusion, exclusion and ‘policing’ during play. The findings challenge dominant teacher constructions of the playground as a ‘free space’ and demonstrate how the playground operates as a site of learning gender through forms of ‘policing’ that involve boys bullying girls and boys who do not conform to gender norms. The findings raise implications for the development of curriculum material and teaching practices that would assist primary schoolteachers to reflect more deeply on young learners’ personal experiences and perspectives around gender and play.

Introduction

A growing body of research on young children and play shows that gender is one of the significant factors that shape children’s play behaviours at school and in other contexts (McGuffey and Rich Citation1999; Bhana Citation2005; Blaise Citation2005; Renold Citation2005; Swain Citation2006; Clark and Paechter Citation2007; Paechter Citation2007; DePalma and Atkinson Citation2009; Bartholomaeus Citation2012; Huuki and Renold Citation2015; Ronnlund Citation2015). However, this research tends to be adult-centric in that it documents gender patterns in children’s play without engaging deeply and meaningfully with children and the meanings they attach to gender. As a result, very little is known about young children’s experiences and the meanings they attach to the roles they enact during play. It is against this background that this ethnographic study explores the meanings and symbolic significance that play, particularly soccer, holds for these young schoolchildren. The study argues that for these participants, play is a source of gendered identification, dis-identification and also a source of power and inequality. By focusing specifically on children’s gendered constructions and experiences on the school playground, it calls into question the taken-for-granted teacher constructions of the playground as a space of ‘free choice’, as opposed to the classroom where teachers assert power and authority over all classroom activities. This study draws attention to the ways in which the playground operates as a gendered site of learning, where children constantly police each other’s behaviours through practices of exclusion and marginalisation, gender violence and bullying. In the context of this study, policing refers to the ways in which children constantly monitor and regulate each other’s playground behaviours, by reinscribing gender stereotypes associated with qualities of hegemonic masculinity, namely, physical and emotional toughness, agility, sporting prowess and bravery. Notions of femininity associated with passivity and emotional and physical fragility are also reinforced and imposed on girls who choose to be on the playground. As will be demonstrated, the policing of gender on the playground contributes to the (re)production of gender boundaries and associated inequalities which, in turn, restricts both boys’ and girls’ movements and freedom during play.

Poststructuralist feminist theory: children as active agents

The study draws on poststructuralist feminist theory to demonstrate the gendered subjectivities and multiple identities of the boys and girls in this study. Gender is learnt and continually performed as we interact with different people in different social contexts (Butler Citation1990; MacNaughton Citation2000; Swain Citation2006; Martin Citation2011). Within this theoretical framework, gender refers to the ways of behaving and presenting oneself in accordance with the social expectations and discourses about what constitutes masculinity and femininity in a particular culture or society (Cranny-Francis et al. Citation2003). This study demonstrates the ways in which young school boys and girls subscribe to and reinforce particular social expectations during play. These expectations manifest in ways that determine who is allowed to participate in soccer. Positions of domination and subordination play themselves out in ways that further perpetuate gender inequalities where girls are policed and prevented from participating in soccer on the playground. However, as the data will show, while some girls accommodate forms of power and domination, it is also evident that there are girls who resist boy power and ‘transgress’ gender ‘boundaries’ and this subjects them to name calling and teasing. In addition, those boys who display effeminate tendencies and dare to forge friendships with girls are also derogated.

The persistence of the patriarchal discourse in South Africa relies on and is fuelled by what Connell (Citation1995) termed hegemonic masculinity – a culturally exalted form of masculinity which gives power and privilege to particular men and boys, while normalising the subordination of women and girls and men and boys who do not meet hegemonic standards. Hegemonic masculinity is a dominant cultural ideal of masculinity centred on authority, physical and emotional toughness, superiority, sporting prowess, aggression, violence, heterosexuality and male homo-social bonding (Swain Citation2006; Jewkes and Morrell Citation2010; Bartholomaeus Citation2012). Hegemonic masculinity is a dominant ideal of masculinity embodied only by a few men and boys; nevertheless, many males support it because it gives them power and privilege over females (Hearn and Morrell Citation2012). Notwithstanding the fact that children are active participants in the gendering of their identities, children’s gendered ways of behaving are informed by the dominant discourses that circulate within their respective cultures and societies (Bartholomaeus Citation2012).

Children learn to behave and present and position themselves in gendered ways through a myriad of socialisation processes, including play, which begins very early in life (Martin Citation2011). In her research with young children at play in a London nursery school, Martin (Citation2011) elaborates on the understanding of gender as learnt by documenting how children new to the school learn and adopt gendered play behaviours by observing the play activities and group organisations of older and more established pupils and reproduce these gender norms in their own play patterns. The poststructuralist feminist perspective posits that children’s gendered behaviours are not simply seen as an imitation or a reproduction of the messages, images and symbols of gender they receive from the adult world. Rather, children are recognised as active agents in accommodating and resisting various gender constructs. In this instance, children learn gender from other children and adults through various social processes and practices of inclusion, exclusion and policing on the playground during break at school.

In her US-based ethnographic work with children at play, Thorne (Citation1993) highlights children’s gendering of play and demonstrates that when boys and girls in the elementary years of schooling come together on the playground they often do so as gendered beings with strong investments in maintaining and policing the boundaries between masculinity and femininity. Thorne (Citation1993), and more recently, Huuki and Renold (Citation2015) suggest that boys are particularly more actively engaged in the (re)production of gendered play and associated inequalities than girls. Dominant cultural practices of hegemonic masculinity imbued with exclusionary violence against girls (and some boys) taint the overall schooling experiences of girls and some boys (Bhana Citation2012; Mayeza Citation2015). This paper explores how a group of young South African schoolboys construct their masculine identities and give meaning to gender power relations using soccer to marginalise and exclude girls and other boys. However, the paper does not seek to reify the marginalisation of girls and their perspectives on gender. Rather, it engages with girls and focuses on their agential roles in the social construction of their gender identities. How girls construct gender identities through play and how they react to boys’ hegemonic positioning on the primary school playground are critical areas explored in the paper.

Constructing masculine and feminine identities during play

Central to the poststructuralist feminist theory is the understanding of masculinities and femininities as plural, relational and multidimensional, rather than singular and homogenous (MacNaughton Citation2000; Bhana Citation2005, Citation2008; Swain Citation2006). There exist various kinds of individual differences within the gendered categories. In his study on the construction of masculinities among 10- and 11-year-old boys in three different schools in the UK, Swain (Citation2006) found that there were different patterns of masculinity both between and within each setting that drew on the different cultural and material resources available in each setting. In her research with seven- to eight-year-old children at play at a primary school in South Africa, Bhana (Citation2005) documented how girls challenged boys’ domination on the school playground by enacting sexualised games in which they lifted their dresses to show off their panties. The boys abandoned the playground space as they found this practice contaminating to their construction of masculinity – one which involved a distinct separation from girls. Gendered playground rituals and practices such as this emerge as girls demonstrate powerful forms of resistance to boys’ claims of power and domination over them during play. This, in turn, challenges the common-sense patriarchal stereotyping of girls as docile and subservient to boys’ domination. The research by Swain (Citation2006) and Bhana (Citation2005) suggest that there are different ways of ‘performing’ ‘boy’ and ‘girl’, with some gendered performances being viewed as more socially acceptable than others. The different social expectations placed upon boys and girls work to reproduce the dominant discourse of gender difference and its associated inequalities. This paper is concerned with how young children in a South African township school learn to perform masculinities and femininities through their school playground cultures and practices.

A township primary school

The research site for my study is a primary school located in a black working-class township outside Durban. Although schools are less racialised in post-apartheid South Africa than during apartheid, most schools in the black townships continue to remain predominantly black as they were during apartheid and they are the poorer and most disadvantaged compared to schools in formerly white areas (De Vos Citation2013). The racial profile of both learners and teachers at the school under research is exclusively black. Compared to the majority of formerly non-black schools, learners at this school have fewer opportunities to engage in a variety of organised sport and recreational activities. Organised sporting activities for learners are limited to soccer and netball. These sporting codes are strictly gendered, with soccer mainly played by boys and netball only played by girls. The school does not have its own formal sports grounds and depends on the nearby community sports grounds for organised sporting activities. Space for break-time play activities is also very limited especially in light of the challenge of overcrowded classrooms. During break, children use the schoolyard to play different games. Therefore, I use the term ‘playground’ in a broad sense to describe this play space in the schoolyard which is dominated by boys during breaks. The playground is predominantly used for soccer games which excludes all girls and some boys – particularly those who are viewed as not ‘properly’ masculine and labelled ‘gay’.

Methodology: a critical child-centred ethnographic approach

The view of children as experts in their everyday school playground behaviours and interactions informed my decision to use ethnography as the research design for this study. Thorne (Citation1993, 11) uses the term ‘learning from kids’ to describe a critical child-centred ethnographic approach which seeks to ‘democratise’ adult–child power relations in order to engage with children as experts on their social lives. Taking a child-centred ethnographic approach to learning about the gendered practices of children on the school playground from their perspectives, I tried to forge friendships and relationships that were not imbued with power differentials, with these children. I did this by mingling with and interacting with the children on the playground during the breaks. When I sat or stood on the margins of the playground, observing and taking notes while the boys played soccer, they often tried to persuade me to join them, a gesture to which I always responded positively. For example, it was not uncommon for the boys like NtokozoFootnote1 who played soccer, to shout, ‘coach … you can’t get the ball, come and get it … come and let’s play!’ My willingness and constant positive reactions to their appeals were followed by humour as the boys mocked and laughed at me every time they kicked the ball to me and it passed through my legs. The fun and humour these boys derived when I played with them, especially when they ‘beat’ me, seemed to contribute significantly to them becoming comfortable around me. I befriended these children not by showing them how good I was at soccer or instructing them on how they should play, but rather by playing with them and allowing them to be themselves. In my opinion, this showed them a playful, approachable and accessible side to me.

Although playing with the boys enabled them to relate to me more as a peer than as an authoritative figure, they referred to me as ‘coach’ in ways that reinforced my position as an adult male who was more knowledgeable about soccer than they were. Given that coach is generally used to connote an expert and a leader, these boys constructed me as such and expected me to control how play was conducted. I was not comfortable with the coach title and the associated responsibilities as it in some way detracted from my aim of establishing democratic relations with the children. So, instead of conforming to their expectations of me as the authority figure, I became a willing learner and repositioned them as the experts whom I constantly sought assistance from regarding the rules of the game. Interestingly, I was referred to as ‘coach’ frequently by the boys and rarely by the girls, even among those girls who showed an interest in soccer. I attributed this to the boys’ attempts to express a shared sense of male identity and to construct a ‘masculine’ relationship with me.

Girls constructing me as a source of support

While I was observing learners on the playground, some girls approached me for help and support, while boys approached me in a friendly manner inviting me to participate in their playground activities, especially soccer. Oftentimes, girls asked me to mediate in their power struggles with boys on the playground:

I remember a young girl who came to me crying and when I asked what has happened in order to understand why she was crying, she said that there was another boy who would not move off the swing known to be for girls which she wanted to use herself. My reaction to her was with empathy but I then told her to go and tell Miss Ndaba, her class teacher who was inside class to deal with that boy who made her cry. (Diary entry, 8 March 2013)
Some children approached me to act as a mediator during conflict on the playground. I assessed each case individually and I intervened where it did not require me to impose any form of discipline. When children reported incidents of misbehaviour or conflict on the playground to me, I used Thorne’s (Citation1993) strategy of referring them to their teachers in an effort to distance myself from being seen as a formal authoritative figure.

Sampling strategy

Participants for further interviews and participation in the study were selected during my observations on the playground. By and large, the selection of participants was a spontaneous process, contingent on the nature of my relationships with the boys and girls and the issues they raised in relation to play. However, my observations and interactions on the playground largely focused on the boys who regularly played soccer. What drew me to these boys was not only my interest in them and their strong investment in soccer as a key source of identification, but also because they wanted me as part of their inner circle. My interactions with them permitted a perspective into the ways in which some boys and girls became victims of exclusionary practices and bullying when they dared to challenge the male hegemonic domain of soccer. I then developed an interest in exploring the categories of gender which the children used by engaging those who were perceived to be transgressing and embodying non-normative gender behaviours through play. Boys and girls who were victims of bullying and coerced onto the margins of the playground became key informants and had interesting responses during the conversations.

Encouraging conversations through drawings

In addition to interacting with the children through informal and spontaneous conversations during my observations on the playground, open-ended semi-structured conversations were conducted with them. The children were required to draw images and these child-centred drawings were used to stimulate gender-focused conversations. I invited the children to take part in a graphic-narrative exercise (GNE) where I gave them drawing resources and instructions to draw pictures of play incidents involving their play sessions with friends at school and then to talk about these. The drawings that children produced in the GNE can be viewed as visual reflexive methodology (Hunter Citation2012). This is a self-reflexive drawing methodology in social research that involves participants producing drawings that seek to reveal their unique experiences, knowledge, worldviews, interests and subjectivities (Hunter Citation2012). It uses drawings as a way of gaining visual insights into each participant’s symbolic perceptions of social reality. In the context of this study, drawing was used as a way of encouraging the young boys and girls to reflect on their often taken-for-granted everyday playground behaviours and relations during break at school.

To promote conversations about gender and to understand the content of the drawings, I moved from one child to the other probing them about their drawings. The questions, borne out of the drawings themselves, inquired into the meanings different children hold for the gendered representations in their individual drawings. This self-reflexive and participatory exercise encouraged the children to reflect critically on their own perceptions and their normalised gendered identifications, behaviours and interactions they forge and enact through play. The drawings served different purposes: to document children’s play activities; to enable children to communicate their experiences and understandings regarding the different forms of play they engage or disengage in; and is a source of data for analytical interpretation.

While drawings were a significant method to encourage semi-structured conversations about gender and play, not all the conversations involved drawings. Some of the semi-structured interviews were used specifically to speak to the children. For these discussions, semi-structured interview questions based on my own observations during play were explored. Certain topics and issues raised by the children during the GNE and informally on the playground were followed up on at this point.

Thematic analysis: an inductive approach

A thematic analysis was employed to interpret and discuss data. Braun and Clarke (Citation2006) define thematic analysis as the systematic study of research data in order to identify themes about certain patterns of thought, experience or behaviour and explain these in terms of how they address the concerns of the study. The thematic analysis process involved two main stages. First, the data were studied as a whole in order to code and develop themes inductively (Pattman Citation2013). Second, the emerging themes were subjected to a poststructural feminist analysis. While the study foregrounds children’s own views and experiences regarding gender and play, these are not taken at face value. Rather, the poststructural feminist lens is used as an analytical tool to inform the analysis and interpretation of the data. The transgression of gender boundaries on the school playground and the policing thereof through exclusionary practices, bullying and marginalisation emerged as one of the key themes in the analysis of the data.

‘Playing with girls is not allowed’: transgressing gender boundaries in soccer

The term gender-transgressive play was developed during earlier processes of conducting the study. This term describes some children’s playground behaviours that challenge the ‘normativity’ of gendered play and friendships. In the study, gender-transgressive play took many different forms and had varying repercussions. To explore these, I focus on a drawing done by a boy (Wandile, nine years old) in which he is playing a soccer game with another boy and a girl on the playground. I focus on this drawing because it illustrates a common form of ‘gender-transgressive’ play which symbolises the construction of soccer by boys as not just a game which happens to be played by more boys than girls, but also depicts how normative representations of masculinity is challenged (Figure 1):

Me and my friend Anele play soccer everyday at school on the yard. My friend Amahle, she is a goalkeeper. Anele scored a goal and he is celebrating the whole day and he keeps laughing.
They [other boys from my class] like to say to me that playing with girls is not allowed and I get very angry [when the boys say that] but we keep playing with Amahle and it’s lots of fun playing soccer with her.

One of the key observations that emerged pointed to the significance many boys attach to soccer which signifies ‘approved-of masculine traits’ such as toughness and strength, in ways which excludes and marginalises girls. In light of this, Wandile insists on playing soccer with Amahle (a 10-year-old girl) and this appears to be unusual and transgressive. Even though Wandile views Amahle as a friend with a common interest in soccer, she is not portrayed as equal to the two boys. She is positioned as the goalkeeper and also smaller than her two male playmates in the picture. When I asked Wandile why Amahle was a goalkeeper and not him or his male friend in the picture (Anele, nine years old), he replied by saying ‘I don’t like to be a goalkeeper because you don’t play more in the game like others … [As a goalkeeper] you just stand there in the goalposts and you don’t get to play more like others on the playground.’ Wandile views the position of a goalkeeper as less important in relation to other positions. Observations of, and interactions with, boys at the school who gained popularity for being good in soccer and displaying their skill daily on the playground, confirmed that being a goalkeeper was a position which not many boys liked playing. Being a goalkeeper positions one on the margins of the game and involves less active participation than that of other players. The low-status construction of the position of goalkeeper became evident also in the way in which this position was often relegated to boys who were not considered as very skilled in soccer; boys who were not likely to be among the first team players chosen to represent competing teams during soccer games at break. Portraying Amahle as a goalkeeper can also be interpreted as having a less involved role and position which has the effect of reinforcing the construction of soccer in which the most sought-after positions are afforded to boys. In the picture, although Amahle is part of the soccer game with the two boys, the ball is positioned between the two boys thereby implying their active role in the game while Amahle looks on. Amahle’s insignificance and inferiority is also evident in the way she is positioned on the outer margin of the field, away from the ball which is in the boys’ possession. The boys, in contrast, are foregrounded, occupying a dominant position in the picture and subsequently on the field.

Although Wandile staunchly defends his decision to play soccer with Amahle and is very angry when the other boys suggest that she should not be allowed to play, his picture suggests that despite his inclusion of her, she will still occupy a subordinate position in the game and cannot be viewed as equal to the boys. Despite this very provisional acceptance of Amahle who occupies a relatively insignificant position, Wandile is nevertheless seen by his male peers as ‘transgressing’ the norms of masculinity.

When questioned about how other girls react to her playing soccer with the boys, Amahle reported that the other girls do not see this as a problem at all and that even though most of her friends are girls, she loves soccer and often plays soccer with boys at school because not many girls in school like soccer. This contrasted with the attitude of the boys towards Wandile and Anele playing soccer with Amahle which is deemed inappropriate and ‘girly’ which calls into question their masculinity in the eyes of other boys. When Wandile and Anele play soccer with Amahle it is met with extreme disapproval from other boys and this resonates with research that shows the greater level of pressure is generally experienced by boys to conform to social expectations (McGuffey and Rich Citation1999). In a US-based observation study with 12-year-old children at play at a summer camp, McGuffey and Rich (Citation1999) found that although the gender ‘boundaries’ for girls and boys were equally clear, the consequences for girl-transgressors were not as unpleasant as those experienced by boy-transgressors. While boys were generally criticised by other boys for transgressing gender during play, girls who challenged gender expectations during play did not experience much criticism from the other girls (McGuffey and Rich Citation1999). On the contrary, girls’ transgressions were often praised and validated by the other girls (McGuffey and Rich Citation1999).

Children’s gender-transgressive behaviours on the playground are interesting from a poststructuralist feminist standpoint which posits that while children learn gender through socialisation processes, they are not passive objects who simply absorb gender norms (MacNaughton Citation2000). Rather, they are active agents who negotiate and make their own choices in regard to gender (Martin Citation2011). Wandile’s understanding that ‘playing with girls is not allowed’ illustrates one of many ways in which children ‘police’ gender ‘boundaries’ in their play. However, he goes on to demonstrate his agential power, pointing out that ‘we keep playing with Amahle and it’s lot of fun playing soccer with Amahle’. Wandile resists societal expectations which reinforce gender homogeneity in friendships and limit opportunities for cross-gender friendships by refusing to allow these to guide and determine his choices regarding who he is allowed to play with at school. However, this is not only about Wandile’s agency; all three children show agency as they do not simply allow societal norms and expectations regarding cross-gender friendships to determine their behaviours and relationships during play, but rather they negotiate their choices and in the process call into question the rigidity of the gender ‘boundaries’ that generally characterise play and play relations at school. As Prout and James (Citation1997) have argued, children think and behave as individuals and as active agents who attach meanings to their play behaviours and relations, rather than as a homogenous collective. Wandile demonstrates personal agency as he defies the gender norms that usually determine what constitutes an appropriate soccer playmate and in so doing, resists the disapproval of his male peers. Indeed, examining gender socialisation from the poststructuralist feminist perspective we learn how children actively participate in the gendering of their identities (MacNaughton Citation2000). As active agents in gender socialisation, children have the capacity either to accept or reject certain norms of gender (Martin Citation2011). By resisting the dominant construction of soccer as a masculine sport, Wandile’s account illustrates the tenets of the poststructural feminist theory whereby children are positioned as active negotiators rather than passive recipients of gender norms.

The ‘tomboy’ category: acceptance of girls who play soccer

During my conversations with the boys, soccer emerged not only as an important signifier of what it means to be ‘properly’ male but competence in soccer was also cited as a key requirement for girls to gain membership to the boys’ playgroups and friendship circles. The boys differentiated between girls who are athletic and good in soccer but who also inhabit and display the usual, expected feminine traits. They compared these girls with other girls whom they constructed in derogatory ways as ‘tomboys’ because, besides these girls’ interest and competence in soccer, they were perceived to have ‘masculine’ qualities which includes showing too little concern about their physical appearance, spending most of their leisure time with boys, and constantly getting into trouble for engaging in fights at school. How boys construct the ‘tomboy’ social category in relation to ‘normal’ girls is captured in the following conversation with Wandile and his male friend, Anele:

Emmanuel to Wandile:
Is Amahle the only girl you play soccer with at school?

Wandile:
Yes, she is good in soccer.

Emmanuel:
Are there other games you play with her?

Wandile:
She’s our friend. She plays soccer with us, but sometimes she plays skipping rope with girls. There are other girls that Amahle likes to bring with her when she comes to play soccer with us and we tell them to stand on the side of the playing yard to watch us play, and they can choose a team they would like to support.

While listening to Wandile describing how he constructs Amahle differently in relation to other girls at school, I was interrupted by Anele who whispered ‘ … but other girls are tomboys’. Anele’s utterances prompted a conversation about how ‘tomboy’ is constructed by these two boys:

Emmanuel:
I am sorry to interrupt you, Wandile, but I will come back to you. I think I heard the word ‘tomboy’ coming from you Anele, and I wonder what tomboy means?

Anele:
A tomboy is a girl who is trying to be a boy.

Emmanuel to Anele:
OK, but how do you see a tomboy?

Anele:
You’ll see she’s a tomboy when she spends lot of time with you and she even plays soccer with you even if she does not know you  … 

Emmanuel:
Do you think Amahle is a tomboy or not?

Wandile:
Amahle is a normal girl and not a tomboy. Tomboys are [girls] trying to be boys, they speak in a strong voice and do wrong things like to fighting, and they smoke too. They exercise a lot to make their muscles big and strong, they are tough girls.

The boys are critical of tomboys, particularly for ‘trying to be like boys’ beyond just liking and being good in soccer. Although she likes soccer – a game that is perceived to be ‘for boys’ – Amahle is admired by Wandile and Anele for being skilful in soccer. They allude to Amahle being able to negotiate her relationships with girlfriends and play games constructed as ‘for girls’ such as skipping. Evidently, simply playing soccer with boys does not signify ‘tomboy’ qualities, but if other masculine behaviours such as fighting, smoking and being big, strong and tough are apparent, it justifies the tomboy label.

Wandile and Anele’s construction of Amahle as a ‘normal’ girl who is simply good in soccer is in contention with the way in which young children construct the category tomboy in McGuffey and Rich’s (Citation1999) study. McGuffey and Rich (Citation1999) found that the term tomboy was applied to girls who engage in games constructed as for boys and also those girls are in boys’ company often. Furthermore, McGuffey and Rich (Citation1999) reported that girls were required to perform gender in ways considered ‘masculine’ in order to gain acceptance into boys’ social groups. However, they also found that in performing gender in perceived masculine ways through play, girls not only gained membership of boys’ playgroups, and access to boys’ games and play spaces but also incurred the label of tomboy from the very same boys they wanted to impress and befriend (McGuffey and Rich Citation1999).

Although Amahle does not fall into the derided ‘tomboy’ category according to her two male friends, Wandile and Anele, she does experience forms of criticisms from other boys at the school for playing soccer. In this instance, these boys’ criticisms and less nuanced attitudes more closely mirror those of the boys in the McGuffey and Rich (Citation1999) study. Amahle is aware of this. Although she reported that she likes soccer very much, she does not play as often as she would like to with the boys at school because many boys do not allow her to play soccer with them. They say that she is a girl and she must play ‘girly’ games as do the majority of girls at the school:

Amahle:
Many other boys here at school don’t want to play soccer with girls. They say we’ll get injured. They say soccer is only for boys and say they don’t play with girls and call girls who play soccer tomboys. They say girls don’t play soccer, they always like to say that when there are girls who want to play with them … They like to say I must go and skip like other girls and I must not play with them. They say [that] they don’t play with girls and because I’m [a] girl I must also play with other girls.

The negative reactions from the majority of boys at school upset Amahle as she found their attitudes to be unfair and discriminatory:

Emmanuel:
How does it make you feel to be called a tomboy?

Amahle:
It makes me feel very sad. They [boys] say we are trying to be boys, but we are girls; not boys. I was very angry when they said tomboy to me. I went home and told my mum that there were boys who called me tomboy here at school and she said she’ll come here at school to ask them why they call me tomboy.

The children’s use of tomboy as a gender policing term is also reported in other school-based studies on girls and femininities. In her study on the ways in which 9–11-year-old children construct the term ‘tomboy’, Paechter (Citation2010) found that this term was commonly applied to girls who played soccer; it was used in ways that disassociated these girls from a ‘feminine’ identity. Paechter (Citation2010) notes that ‘tomboy’ was constantly constructed in opposition to the term, ‘girly girl’ which was used to construct what was seen as ‘normative’ ways of ‘doing girl’. Among girls in the current study, the term tomboy was constructed in opposition to the category of ‘cream girl’. Interestingly, ‘cream girls’ seem to resemble ‘girly girls’ in Paechter’s (Citation2010) study. Being a ‘cream girl’ was associated with ‘performing’ the identity of ‘girl’ in perceived ‘normative’ ways that involved distancing oneself from soccer, a form of play constructed as ‘masculine’. Generally, ‘cream girls’ embodied what Connell (Citation2002) termed ‘emphasised femininity’ – the most honoured way of being a girl, which is less athletic and shows little or no interest in activities, or ways of being nor associating with boys and masculinities. Against this backdrop, ‘tomboys’ emerge as an interesting example of ‘resistant femininities’. That is, femininities that challenge, rather than simply conform to, patriarchal gender norms and power relations (Connell Citation2002). Indeed, from a poststructuralist feminist perspective, the different versions of femininities (and masculinities) are interesting as they illustrate the fluid, complex and multidimensional nature of gender identities. Central to the poststructuralist feminist theory is the view of masculinities and femininities as plural and fluid in the way they are ‘performed’ in everyday social interactions (Butler Citation1990). This is in contrast to the essentialist perspective, which simply views gender as referring to homogeneous and coherent groups of males and females without accounting for the individual differences that exist within the gendered groups (Bhana Citation2008). Girls (and boys) do not fit into a singular and coherent group. Indeed, while some girls at the school seemed supportive of Amahle’s soccer skills, others respond negatively to her playing soccer with the boys:

Amahle:
We call each other friend, and we do ‘high five’ to each other when we greet or when a girl has scored a goal. They clap hands and shout my name when I score a goal or when I’m just dribbling with a ball playing soccer with boys. But other girls don’t like to see me playing soccer, they say I’m a girl, and girls don’t play soccer.

While some girls express their disapproval, it was not the girls who initiated the ‘tomboy’ appellation:

Emmanuel:
Is it only boys who call you tomboy for playing soccer?

Amahle:
Girls don’t call me tomboy. Many girls like it when they see us [girls] playing soccer but boys don’t want to play soccer with girls. Some boys will just push us because they want you to stop playing soccer with them. They want you to fall and get hurt and then stop playing!

Frosh, Phoenix, and Pattman’s (Citation2003) study of 11–14-year-old boys at schools in London found that soccer was constructed symbolically as tough, both physically and emotionally, and as intrinsically masculine. In a similar vein, a majority of boys in the current study spoke about soccer not just in terms of play, but also in terms of their emotional investment in soccer as a medium through which they assert themselves as ‘properly’ masculine. They constructed masculinity relationally through the denigration of girls who play soccer by calling them ‘tomboys’, that is, girls who are not capable of being ‘proper’ girls and who are trying to be like boys. These boys also utilised forms of exclusionary violence on the playground to police girls’ involvement in soccer. The violence produced girls as fragile and their presumed fragilities were presented as benchmarks that make them fail in soccer. The tomboy label and the violence experienced by girls like Amahle work to (re)produce soccer as a masculine attribute and connotes desirable characteristics of strength, agility and toughness, from which girls are excluded.

The dominant symbolic construction of soccer as ‘masculine’: the perspectives of girls

In a group conversation with Amahle and four other girls, I explored further the idea of soccer as symbolically masculine and participation in soccer as a device for shoring up the all-important perceived boundary between being a girl and being a boy. Girls who participate in soccer are positioned as problematic because it blurs the binary construction of gender according to the ways in which girls and boys are positioned in opposition to one another. In this context, the only way to make sense of a girl who plays soccer was to construct her as ‘masculine’ by reclassifying her as a ‘tomboy’. The symbolic gender significance of participation in soccer was important to the boys so much so that girls who play soccer are said to be en route to ‘becoming boys’:

Emmanuel:
Why do you think many boys don’t like to play soccer with girls?

Zinhle [nine years old]:
They say we’ll change and become boys!

Lizi identified another dimension of gender risk associated with girls who play soccer – the potential for questioning the superior physical competence of boys that is an expected norm of hegemonic masculinity. Sporting prowess and winning at all costs is a strong feature of boys’ masculine identities and girls’ victory in any sport can be particularly threatening to the prevailing gender order which relies on a construction of masculinity that connotes physical superiority. ‘Chasing girls away’ from soccer games or deployment of the unwelcome ‘tomboy’ label thus acts as a gender policing strategy that comes into play when male dominance is threatened:

Lizi:
We ask to play soccer with them and they say fine, then we play with them. Then we score goals and we beat them, we have more goals than them, then they start to tell us to go away. And they say we will change and become boys if we continue to play soccer with them. They say we’ll be tomboys.

Although the ‘tomboy’ label was not welcome, Amahle was able to challenge those boys who would have preferred her not to play soccer. Others reported feeling ‘upset’ and being called a ‘tomboy’ was seen as serious enough, by some girls, to be reported to a teacher on occasion:

Emmanuel:
How do you feel about being called a tomboy?

Amahle:
I don’t care, it really doesn’t matter to me whether they call me tomboy or not but I will continue playing soccer!

Sindiswa [10 years old]:
I feel upset because I know that I’m not a tomboy.

Zinhle:
I go and tell Miss, and sometimes Miss will hit them with a stickFootnote2 but sometimes she will shout at them and tell them not to say that again.

Lizi:
I do feel upset but I don’t worry about it too much, I forget about it easily.

For some, like Gugu [10 years old],
an equivalent riposte to being called a ‘tomboy’ is to call a boy ‘gay’:

Gugu:
A boy who calls me tomboy I also call him gay!

As active agents, according to Prout and James (Citation1997), girls react not with passivity but with various strategies of resistance against boys who exercise power through marginalising and excluding girls on the playground. Power is therefore not simply confined to boys who exercise it over docile and conforming girls (Bhana Citation2008). Rather, girls have possibilities of exercising power in relation to boys and these manifest in the strategies they use to resist boy power on the playground (Bhana Citation2005). Indeed, as Foucault (Citation1978) argues, where there is power, there is also resistance. The girls use different strategies to resist the disapproval of boys and these range from contesting the imposition of the label ‘because I know that I am not a tomboy’ to denying that it has any power to affect them – ‘I don’t care, it really doesn’t matter to me whether they call me tomboy or not but I will continue playing soccer!’ and also by reciprocating the perceived insult by calling the boy ‘gay’.

Policing gender through the term ‘gay’

The term ‘gay’ was widely used by the children as a strategy for policing not only gendered games but also cross-gender friendships in school. In the same way that girls who chose to play soccer risked being labelled ‘tomboys’, boys who did not want to participate in activities largely associated with girls for fear of being denigrated and being called ‘gay’. Again, it was predominantly boys who policed gendered sport and play activities:

Emmanuel to Anele:
You said you play soccer but are there other games you like?

Anele:
I don’t play skipping rope because it’s a girls’ game. Like when people see you skipping with girls they would ask you: are you a girl now? And they call you by things you don’t like, … they say you gay.

Emmanuel:
Who says that?

Anele:
It’s the other boys who you used to play with, and they say you’re gay when they see you playing with girls and not with them anymore. Boys would say you’re gay when you play with girls and not with them.

The data illustrate that to be seen in the company of a girl, boys ran the risk of it being perceived as a romantic relationship, thereby negating any notion that boys and girls could develop platonic relationships. Within the early schooling context, where sexuality among children is constructed as taboo (Pattman and Chege Citation2003), suspected romance among pupils invites ‘trouble’ with teachers; this is not something that any learner wishes for him or herself:

Anele:
Sometimes, when they see you playing with your friend who’s a girl, like Amahle, they like to say she is your girlfriend. They just say it’s your girlfriend, even if they don’t know that the girl you play with could be your sister. Whenever they see you walking with a girl they’d say you trying to get her to be your girlfriend. Like when you are walking with a girl who is about your age they’d say you are lovers; but they don’t know maybe she’s just your friend or your sister.

In this extract, Anele highlights the difficulties of forging and maintaining cross-gender friendships in a school context where gender boundaries are constantly policed. The strict policing of gender boundaries by the children not only reduces play possibilities for both boys and girls, but also undermines the possibility of creating and sustaining cross-gender friendships among pupils in ways that (re)produce gender polarity in the early years. Same sex friendships are constructed as normative and encouraged in opposition to cross-gender friendship interactions which are constructed as anomalous and which invite social sanction (Pattman and Chege Citation2003). Befriending and playing with children of the opposite sex is sexualised and seen as transgressing normative constructions of masculinity and femininity and may lead to criticism and rejection.

Many children express the normalcy of gender constructs despite the disharmony it creates and those who are perceived to transgress become victims of those who claim and wield the power. In another group discussion, nine-year-old Thabo reported being called gay at school even though he did not play with girls but played soccer regularly with boys:

Thabo:
I have been called gay. It was when the other day we were playing soccer on the school backyard, one other boy kicked the ball over the fence of the school and it went to the bushes on the other side. Because I was youngest there, one of the older boys told me to jump over the fence to fetch the ball and I said no; then he called me a mama’s boy, and another one called me gay and told me to go away and not come to play soccer with them again.

Interestingly, when Thabo spoke about being labelled gay, he lacked the confidence and boldness when he spoke about other issues. Now he spoke in softer tones, almost in a whisper, and his facial expression was arguably one of humiliation and sadness. On the other hand, talk about gay invoked mocking and laughter from the other boys. When prompted further about what ‘gay’ means, Thabo said, ‘they mean you are a girl, they are calling you a girl  … ’, to which 10-year-old Sizwe interjected, ‘it’s a sissy-boy!’ In the same way that ‘tomboys’ were those girls who chose to befriend boys and play games typically associated with boys, according to nine-year-old Spha, boys who are ‘gay’ are:

The other boys who don’t want to play soccer with us, and they always play with girls. Some boys like to play with girls because they know that if they hit a girl she won’t hit them back and they know that if they hurt us we would fight back.
For Ntokozo (10 years old) though, to be ‘gay’ was to be much more than simply someone who played games with girls. A gay boy, he argued, is a boy who wants to be a girl:

Gay is a boy who likes to be a girl so they play with girls a lot. They [gays] wear skirts and high heel shoes like girls. They leave their hair to grow too long and braid them, they wear makeup and lipstick, walk like they are modelling … speak in girls’ [high pitched] voice  … 
This particular conversation drew much laughter and amusement from the boys especially when ‘gay characteristics’ were mentioned or dramatised. For example, the ‘limp wrist’ was enacted by some of the boys to demonstrate ‘gay gestures’. They also dramatised the high pitched voice and ‘typically gay’ walk. The derogatory way in which gayness was discussed suggests the (re)production of heteronormativity – a dominant discourse of sexuality that constructs heterosexuality as ‘normal’ and non-heterosexual sexuality is viewed in a negative light (Msibi Citation2013). It can be argued that the contemptuous manner in which these boys spoke about boys they considered to be gay highlights sentiments that cannot be simply detached from certain expressions of homophobia (Bhana Citation2014). The literature shows that homophobia takes many forms which can range from subtle homophobic gossip, to jokes, acts of violence, bullying and exclusion as well as many other ways of showing contempt for gender-transgressive play and other behavioural patterns (Msibi Citation2013). The hilarity and humour which characterised this group conversation exemplifies a construction of masculinity that hinges on derogating and mocking boys whom they perceive as ‘feminine’ or ‘unmasculine’. While earlier conversations with girls revealed how tomboy is used to construct girls who play soccer as ‘masculine’, the above conversation indicates how gay is used to construct boys who disassociate themselves from soccer as effeminate and ‘feminine’. However, gay is not only used to identify boys who are not interested in soccer, but in Thabo’s case, it is precisely because he does want to play soccer and be accepted as a ‘regular’ boy that bullying and labelling him gay becomes hurtful. In Thabo’s case, he is associated with derided forms of masculinity (absence of courage, for example) and with the repudiated feminine when he refuses to take instructions from the older boys. In this particular context, ‘gay’ is used not as a form of criticism of boys who are suspected of having same sex desires, but to describe boys who do not conform to the expectations of dominant masculinity. It is also used as a strategy for wielding power and influence over other boys. To be ‘gay’ is viewed to be lacking the attributes of ‘normative’ masculinity in one way or another. The gay label is used as a form of bullying and marginalisation, to abuse, insult and criticise and this is levelled at boys who construct their masculine identities outside the perceived normativity of soccer brevity and male homo-social friendship bonding.

Implications for teaching and curriculum

Exploring gender ‘transgressions’ and focusing on the treatment of gender ‘transgressors’ on the school playground provide insights into the everyday constructions of gender among young children. It also provides an opportunity to explore the ways in which these young children invest in (re)producing polarised ways of performing gender, and the associated inequalities. The school playground is not simply a site of enjoyment and where children can spend their free time. Rather, the findings show that it is a space where some boys and girls are subjected to humiliation, anxiety and demoralisation, while for others, it is a place where they are able to exercise domination and cement hegemonic positions. I believe that Life Orientation can play a vital role in terms of challenging the ‘normative’ gender expectations that constrain and limit boys’ and girls’ interests and possibilities on the playground. Life Orientation is a compulsory learning area for all learners in South African schools and is described by the Department of Education (Citation2002, 4) as a ‘holistic approach to the personal, physical, emotional, intellectual, spiritual and social development of learners’. Life Orientation is concerned with exploring ways of promoting positive human and social development by challenging prejudices, inequalities and discriminatory attitudes and practices.

I would like to recommend that Life Orientation curriculum developers and teachers be sensitised to the issues of gendered play so that the prevalent exclusionary practices and the marginalisation of girls in soccer as well as the denigration of boys who dis-identify with soccer are addressed effectively. This sensitisation could be realised in the early years where educational practitioners take children’s concerns and anxieties seriously and perspectives on issues around gender, play, sexuality and schooling are included. The everyday experiences of girls who play soccer and of those boys who construct their identities outside the dominant discourse of soccer as a symbolic marker of what it means to be ‘masculine’, requires urgent attention and action. Educating young children on sexuality will provide an educational opportunity for the Life Orientation teachers to engage with learners and to challenge discriminatory practices and attitudes. Life Orientation curriculum and practice needs to reflect more deeply on children’s concerns and issues around the practices and processes of gender policing among children during play. This would be an effective way of using curriculum and classroom practices meaningfully to raise gender awareness among boys and girls in the early years of schooling. Gender awareness, I believe, is an important first step in the direction of realising effective solutions.

