How 2020 Changed Hollywood, and the Movies, ForeverHollywood studios have used the pandemic to heed the advice of former Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel: “You never want a serious crisis to go to waste.”For decades, the film business has remained frustratingly resistant to change. Movie theater owners have held firm about the boundaries of a traditional theatrical release. Up to this year, a studio’s newest blockbuster had to play in cinemas for 90 days before its home entertainment launch. Film exhibitor’s conventional wisdom: People wouldn’t pay to see the latest Marvel movie in theaters if they could wait a few weeks to watch it on-demand at home. It fostered an often openly contentious relationship with studios, who have long attempted to shorten that three-month timeframe in an effort to reduce marketing costs.The rise of streaming services, which gave customers the ability to watch hundreds upon hundreds of titles with the click of a button, put additional pressure on the ironclad theatrical window. Cracks started to appear. Yet theater operators pushed to prolong conversations that had the potential to upend their business model for as long as possible so they could keep milking the lengthy period of big-screen exclusivity until they had no choice but to yield to market forces.Then, the pandemic changed everything — as massive, world-shaking events have a tendency to do. Theaters were forced to close and exhibitors were left without revenue for months. Studios tore up their release schedules, postponing some movies to next year and sending others to streaming services or digital rental platforms. Developments that were unthinkable a year ago began to unfold at incredible rates. When cinemas were able to reopen, theater operators quickly learned that their bargaining power had drastically diminished. If they wanted to showcase “The Croods: A New Age” or “Wonder Woman 1984,” exhibitors had to accept that those titles would be available online sooner than usual. The business had been fundamentally altered.“Without the pandemic, you wouldn’t have seen the theatrical windows collapse in the way they did,” says Lisa Bunnell, the president of distribution at Focus Features. “Whether you like it or not, the pandemic forced us to try things that would be harder to do in regular times.”For traditional studios, it’s resulted in a game of 3D chess with action that rivals “Game of Thrones” in terms of pure, head-spinning chaos. Old allegiances crumbled, new alliances were forged with former rivals, battles were waged via press release. In a matter of months, Universal went from being the enemy of cinemas to the savior of the theater business. Not to be outdone, Warner Bros. positioned itself as a villain that could rival nearly any onscreen baddie when the studio announced its entire 2021 slatewould debut simultaneously on HBO Max and in theaters. That was after cinemas fell all over themselves praising the company as their white knight for deciding to open Christopher Nolan‘s time-bending espionage epic “Tenet” on the big screen during summer. Tyrion Lannister would struggle to make sense of these power plays, maneuvers and strategic retreatsIndustry experts agree that, to at least some degree, the changes roiling the film business are going to outlast the pandemic.“A lot of the innovation we’ve seen is going to continue,” predicts Jeff Bock, a box office analyst with Exhibitor Relations. “When we look back at 2020, we will see this isn’t a reboot. It’s a rebuild of the theatrical model.”It remains to be seen how the contours of the new film distribution world become fixed. Studios and theater owners acknowledge the neat and tidy 90-day window is no more. Rather than a one-size fits all model, many believe it could be determined on a studio-by-studio or even film-by-film basis. That means “Fast & Furious” entry “F9” may play exclusively in theaters longer than the upcoming Tom Hanks sci-fi drama “Bios,” even though both hail from Universal Pictures.“The conversation is more than open at this point,” says Shawn Robbins, chief analyst at BoxOffice.com. “I don’t think the extreme examples will stick. I don’t necessarily see big movies going day-and-date very often,” he adds, in reference to the hybrid release of “Wonder Woman 1984.” “There will be a middle ground.”niversal has started to test that after forging historic pacts with AMC, Cinemark and Cineplex to allow the studio to put new movies on demand within weeks of their theatrical debut. Universal is expected to hammer out a similar deal with Regal, the second-largest U.S. circuit. In return, exhibitors are getting a cut of the digital profits. Universal argues that their deal is more financially viable for the studio in the long run because it requires a transaction on each individual title, in contrast with the subscription services that offer thousands of programs for one monthly price.“We feel ours is the most sustainable business model,” says Peter Levinsohn, Universal’s vice chairman and chief distribution officer, who led negotiations on agreements with AMC, Cinemark and Cineplex. “It’s something that works for both sides. It creates a stronger ecosystem.”The problem is these companies are up against a ticking clock. AMC is teetering on the verge of bankruptcy. It has sold stock and renegotiated with creditors to try to improve its liquidity, but debt is a pesky thing. At some point it needs to be repaid. Cinemark and Cineworld, which owns Regal, also are highly leveraged. And those are the exhibition giants, which have strong relationships with banks. Many of the independent theaters, which don’t have access to major lenders, won’t be able to find a lifeline to get them through the worst of the pandemic.At the same time, the major media companies have made it crystal clear that they view challenging Netflix as their greatest imperative. Disney devoted nearly an entire four-hour long investor day to touting its plans to arm Disney Plus, Hulu and its other subscription offerings, while also reorganizing its executive hierarchy to better focus on streaming. Meanwhile, WarnerMedia and Comcast are pouring hundreds of millions of dollars into adding programming for HBO Max and Peacock, respectively, and Viacom is readying Paramount Plus, the re-branded CBS All Access streaming service, for its closeup. The streaming wars promise to grow more pitched in the weeks and months ahead.As for filmmakers, they seem to be making the pivot to the new platforms with relative ease. Netflix boasted new movies from the likes of David Fincher (“Mank”), Spike Lee (“Da Five Bloods”), George Clooney (“The Midnight Sky”), and Aaron Sorkin (“The Trial of the Chicago 7”) in 2020 and has a good chance of converting at least one of these splashy projects into an Oscar winner. And Apple, Amazon, and Hulu countered with new films from auteurs and A-listers such as Sofia Coppola (“On the Rocks”), Sacha Baron Cohen (“Borat Subsequent Moviefilm”), and Lee Daniels (the upcoming “The United States vs. Billie Holiday”). Some of these films were initially set up at traditional studios before the pandemic upended plans for a theatrical release and resulted in a great selloff.“They have a checkbook and they have an aesthetic,” Fincher said of Netflix during an interview this fall. “They’re working with the people they want to work with. I respect that.”Yet even as Fincher looked ahead to the emergence of a different kind of studio system, one built around streamers, he warned of the dangers of a new status quo. “I hope it doesn’t feel clubby,” he said. “I hope it doesn’t feel like there’s an Amazon-type filmmaker and a Netflix-type filmmaker and an Apple-type filmmaker. That feels like subdividing in a twee way.”Despite the convenience and comfort of at-home viewing, Hollywood studios aren’t resigned to the collapse of the theatrical business. Talk to any film executive, and they will ensure you that people are more than eager to resume normal life.“We’ve all heard the analogy that the roaring twenties followed [the 1918] pandemic,” says Tom Rothman, the chairman of Sony Pictures. “That feels instinctively correct.  There’s a tremendous pent up desire to get out of the house and away from our screens and experience life with other people.”Of course, a return to any kind of normalcy — and with it, regular moviegoing — is dependent on a widely distributed COVID-19 vaccine. Most public health experts believe that milestone won’t be reached until late spring or early summer.Harman Moseley, the owner of St. Louis Cinemas, a small chain in the Midwest, has already been burned by turning his marquee lights back on before the pandemic had lifted.“I’m not going to reopen until I’m confident we can attract crowds that will offer us the possibility of economic viability,” Moseley says. “I was open for two months [in the summer]. My payroll was more than my gross. If my rent were due, I would already be bankrupt.”It’s also undeniable that theaters will need to evolve and recalibrate to get people back in their auditoriums. Audiences have spent the past year watching films from their sofa for the same price as a single movie stub. An HBO Max subscription costs $15 per month. Movie tickets in New York City and Los Angeles sell for $20 a pop.“I live in fear of exhibition chomping at the bit to get back to the status quo,” says Chris Aronson, Paramount’s president of domestic distribution. “I do believe people will want to get out of their homes and resume a normal lifestyle, but it’s very shortsighted to think that’s all that needs to be done. Theater owners need to look at every facet of their business, like we’re looking at every facet of ours.”Ted Rogers, the film programmer at Ragtag Cinema, a non-profit independent movie theater in Columbia, Missouri, agrees with Aronson. He understands that showing the next “Jurassic World” sequel won’t be enough to keep the cash registers ringing. He’ll have to also find ways to strengthen the bond between his customers and the cinema he operates.“I think it’s about leaning on what arthouses have been doing this whole time: speaking directly to the audience, not programming to the lowest common denominator,” Rogers says. “That’s what’s going to wow audiences. Not just being a work-a-day exhibitor, but creating a community space.”https://variety.com/2020/film/news/movie-theaters-hollywood-pandemic-2020-recap-1234874385/The Evolution Of Movies : How Has It Changed With Time?“Cinema is a mirror by which we often see ourselves.” – Alejandro Gonzalez InarrituIf 500 people saw a movie, there exist 500 different versions of the same idea conveyed by the movie. Often movies reflect culture, either what the society is or what it aspires to be.From “Gone with the Wind” to “Titanic” to “Avengers: Endgame,” Movies have come a long way. The Technology, Scale, and Medium might have changed, but the essence has remained invariable to storytelling. Any idea or story that the mind can conceive can be given life in the form of Movies.1. The process behind moviesWe see the end output in theatres or in the comfort of our homes (on Over-The-Top (OTT) platforms like Netflix, Amazon Prime, HBO Max, etc.). But in reality, there is a long and ardent process behind movie-making.As with all things, it starts with an idea, an idea that transcribes into a story, which then takes the form of a script detailing the filmmaker’s vision scene by scene.They then pitch this script to multiple studios (Disney, Universal, Warner Bros., etc.). When a studio likes this script, they decide to make the film using its muscle for pre-production, production, and post-production.The filmmaker and studio start with the pre-production activities such as hiring cast and crew, choosing filming locations to set constructions. Post which the movie goes into the production phase, where it gets filmed. In post-production, the movie gets sculpted with music, visual effects, video & sound editing, etc.And while moviemakers often understand the art of movie-making, it becomes a product to be sold on completing production. Now they have to sell this story to the audience.Marketing & distribution step in to ensure that this product is now available to its worldwide audience by promoting it in all possible mediums like billboards and social media. After this, it’s all about delivering an immersive, entertaining experience where your surroundings go dark and the mind lights up.An Overview Of The Movie-Making ProcessIn recent times some creative flexibility has been observed in the above process. For example, studios who own certain characters or intellectual property like Marvel & DC characters hire the right talent to get their movies made. In such cases, big studios control significant aspects of the film, from content creation to distribution.2. How did the movie industry operate?For a considerable period, movies used to stay in theatres for a long time post their initial release before reaching other available forms of Home Entertainment (based on the technological choices/era). For example, Let’s take a movie that acted as the bridge between two distinct generations. Titanic transformed the industry from the old school blockbusters to the new school global hits (with technology, CGI, worldwide markets, etc.) And before the 2010s, blockbuster movies like Titanic used to run in theatres for several months. Titanic was the undisputed leader of Box Office for nearly four months, both in terms of the number of tickets sold and worldwide revenue generated.Post its theatrical run of approximately four months, blockbuster titles used to be available in-Home Entertainment (HE) formats (such as DVD, VCD, etc.) These formats were available in various options based on the decade or era. Options such as rental or purchasable DVDs ruled the HE domain for a considerable amount of time. Until the emergence of the internet.The Dawn of the internet brought in other sources of entertainment in competition to the traditional Movies, Sports, etc. These options gave the consumer alternate forms of entertainment (which resulted in shortened theatrical runs, approximately three months or less). They gave the studios also another platform to sell their content. Hence the Home Entertainment release windows were fast-tracked as a natural consequence to capitalize the most from the movie’s potential.The following is an example of the pre-2020/pandemic norms in Hollywood.1. December 25: Movie releases in Theatres (TH). Ex: Fast and Furious March 10 19: EST (Electronic Sell Through) release of the movie (Ex: Amazon, iTunes)2. April 2: iVOD/cVOD (Internet/Cable Video on Demand) release of the movie (Ex: YouTube, Comcast, Amazon)3. April 30: PST (Physical Sell Through) release of the movie (Ex: DVDs, Blu-ray discs)4. After this, the movie becomes available on Linear TV networks (Ex: HBO)An Overview Of Movie Releases Before And After Pandemic3. How is it functioning now?Amid all the uncertainty surrounding the COVID pandemic, the movie industry did come to a halt, as did many other integral aspects of people’s lives. Around March 2020, most theatres worldwide shut down to prevent the widespread pandemic. The forceful shutting of the movie industry immobilized crucial aspects of the filmmaking process, such as the filming & theatrical release of movies. Since it was not safe for people to gather in numbers, theatres closed, as did other forms of entertainment such as Concerts, Live Sports, etc. This change of unprecedented magnitude was the first since world wars, where major entertainment activities worldwide were shut down.With every problem, there lies an opportunity, as with this change, innovation was the name of the game. Those businesses that innovated survived, and the rest were likely to perish. The founding stone for this innovation was laid a long time back. With the influx of the internet, OTT (Over-The-Top) & VOD (Video on Demand) platforms were rapidly growing. OTT Platforms like Netflix & Amazon Prime were significant players in the US and worldwide before the beginning of the pandemic itself.Shutting down of theatres meant some movies slated for 2020 waited for release dates. In the movie industry, movies are often planned well in advance. Major studios are likely to have tentative release dates for the upcoming 2 to 3 years. Delaying movies of the current year not only does it cumulatively delay the subsequent year’s release dates, but it also decays the potential of the film (due to factors like heavy competition later, loss of audience interest, etc.)Major studios & industry leaders lead the way with innovation. A new format (Premium Video on Demand) and a new release strategy were the most viable options to ensure the movie’s release, guaranteeing both financial and viewership success.The New Format – PVOD (Premium Video on Demand) was essentially releasing the iVOD/cVOD rental formats at an earlier period by shortening the pre-pandemic normal of 12 weeks post-theatrical release window to an earlier release window.There were two ways of doing this; the first one is a Day and Date release in PVOD, which meant the audience can watch a new movie (Ex: Trolls World Tour, Scoob!) on its first release date at the comfort of their homes via the PVOD/rental channels (Ex: Amazon/iTunes)The second way for the PVOD format is by releasing the movie in PVOD 2 to 8 weeks post its release in theatres. This happened once people got used to the new normal during the pandemic. Theatres across the world opened partially with limited seating capacity (50%). This meant that a movie would release in theatres exclusively first (as it was previously). However, the traditional Home Entertainment window of 12 weeks bypassed to release PVOD at an early window of 2 to 8 weeks post Theatrical release. This was the key in catering to a cautious audience during the pandemic between 2020 to 2021. This enabled them to watch a newly released movie at the comfort of their homes within a couple of weeks of its initial release itself.A similar strategy was also tried with EST, where an early EST release (Premium EST or PEST) is offered to people at an early release window. The key difference is that PEST and PVOD were sold at higher price points (25% higher than EST/iVOD/cVOD) due to their exclusivity and early access.The other strategy was a path-breaking option that opened the movie industry to numerous viable release possibilities – a direct OTT release. A movie waiting for its release & does not want to use the PVOD route due to profitability issues, or other reasons can now release the film directly on OTT platforms like Netflix & Amazon Prime. These platforms, which were previously producing small to medium-scale series & movies, now have the chance to release potential blockbuster movies on their platform. Studios also get to reach Millions of customers across the globe at the same time by jumping certain cumbersome aspects posed by the conventional theatrical distribution networks (which includes profit-sharing mechanisms). In this route of OTT platform release, there are many advantages to all parties involved (Studios, OTT Platforms & Audiences) and the number of potential customers.The studios either get a total remuneration paid for the movie upfront (e.g., Netflix made a $200 Million offer for Godzilla vs. Kong to its producers, Legendary Entertainment & Warner Bros.). Or get paid later based on the number of views gathered in a given period or a combination of both (depending upon the scale & genre of the movie). The OTT platforms will now have a wide array of the latest movies across all genres to attract & retain customers. The people will now get to watch new movies on their preferred OTT platforms at their convenience and get a great value for money spent (OTT 1-month subscription ~$10 for new movie + existing array of movies & series vs. ~ $10 Theatre Ticket Price for one movie)Overview of Major OTT Platform in USGiven there are two new gateways (OTT & PVOD) to release films in addition to the existing conventional mediums such as Theatres, EST, iVOD, cVOD, PST. There are numerous beneficial ways a movie can be released to reach the maximum people & make the most profit for the filmmakers & studios.Since there are hundreds of possibilities for any studio or filmmaker to release their movies, how would one know the best release strategy for a movie? Does one size fit all methods work? Or do we scale and change release strategies according to the Budget/Content of the movie? Are certain genre films more suited for large-scale theater experience than being better suited for Home Entertainment? Who decides this? That should be a straightforward answer. In most cases, the one who finances the film decides the release strategy. But how would they know what combination ensures the maximum success to recoup the amount invested and guarantee a profit for all involved?In such an uncertain industry, where more movies fail than succeed (considering the bare minimum of breaking even), the pandemic-induced multiple release strategies compound the existing layers of complexity.In an ocean of uncertainties, the ship with a compass is likely to reach the shore safely. The compass, in this case, is Analytics. Analytics, Insights & Strategy provide the direction to take the movie across to the shores safely and profitably.Analytics, Insights & Strategy (AIS) helps deal with the complex nature of movies and provides a headstrong direction for decision making, be it from optimal marketing spend recommendations to profitable release strategies. There are thousands of films with numerous data points. When complex machine learning models leverage all this data, it yields eye-opening insights for the industry leaders to make smart decisions. Capitalizing on such forces eases the difficulties in creating an enjoyable & profitable movie.4. What will be the future for movies?The Entertainment industry evolves as society progresses forward. Movies & theatres have stood the test of time for decades. There will always be a need for a convincing story, and there will always be people to appreciate good stories. Although with what seems to be a pandemic-induced shift into the world of online entertainment & OTT’s. This change was inevitable and fast-tracked due to unexpected external factors.What the future holds for this industry is exciting for both the filmmakers and the audiences. The audiences have the liberty to watch movies across their preferred mediums early on, rather than the conventional long drawn theatrical only way. The studios now have more ways to engage audiences with their content. In addition to the theatrical experience, they can reach more people faster while ensuring they run a profitable business.We will soon start seeing more movies & studios using the OTT platforms for early releases and the conventional theatre first releases with downstream combinations of other Home Entertainment forms to bring the movie early to the audience on various platforms.On an alternate note, in the future, we might be in a stage where Artificial Intelligence (AI) could be generating scripts or stories based on user inputs for specific genres. An AI tool could produce numerous scripts for filmmakers to choose from. It is exciting to think of its potential, for example, say in the hands of an ace director like Christopher Nolan with inputs given to the AI tool based on movies like Tenet or Inception.Post-Pandemic, when life returns to normal, we are likely to see star-studded, big-budget movies directly being released on Netflix or HBO Max, skipping the conventional theatrical release. Many filmmakers have expressed concerns that the rise of OTT may even lead to the death of theatres.That said, I do not think that the theatres would perish. Theatres were and will always be a social experience to celebrate larger-than-life movies. The number of instances where people go to theatres might reduce since new movies will be offered in the comfort of their homes.With all this discussion surrounding making profitable movies, with the help of Analytics, Insights & Strategy, why don’t filmmakers and studios stop after making a couple of profitable movies?The answer is clear, as stated by Walt Disney, one of the brightest minds of the 20th century, “We don’t make movies to make money, we make money to make more movies.”https://affine.ai/the-evolution-of-movies-how-has-it-changed-with-time/HOW AI VIDEO TOOLS ARE CHANGING THE FILM INDUSTRY 2023AI has made remarkable strides in recent years, impacting various industries and changing how we live and work. With its uncanny ability to reshape itself around cutting-edge technology, the film industry has already begun its fusion with AI tools. You might not believe how AI video tools are changing the film industry in 2023 and beyond. Perhaps you could ask ChatGPT — but we recommend you keep reading to find an objective nexus point between AI tools and filmmakers. AI tools have conjured the voices of Andy Warhol and Anthony Bourdain for their respective documentaries. It’s also making waves in de-aging software that shaves decades off of actors — just look at Harrison Ford in the upcoming Indiana Jones movie. And now, everything from mind-blowing VFX to the way we tell stories is becoming available to the filmmaking masses thanks to Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) tools. TYPES OF AI TOOLS FOR VIDEO AND FILMMAKINGAI filmmaking tools empower small-market and independent filmmakers to punch far above their weight class. The new technology brings big-budget capabilities to filmmakers who would normally never dream of the possibility in their storytelling. Not because they didn’t want to but because it wasn’t possible. This opens up higher-concept storytelling to Indie filmmakers. Now, let’s explore the different types of AI tools for video and filmmaking and afterward discuss the implications of AI technology for the future of the film industry. 1. VIDEO EDITING AND POST-PRODUCTIONAI-powered video editing tools are reshaping the post-production landscape. These tools can analyze video footage, detect patterns, and automatically edit and enhance clips, making the editing process faster and more efficient. AI algorithms can identify the best shots, eliminate unwanted elements, and even generate automatic video summaries. Additionally, AI tools can assist with color grading, noise reduction, and visual effects, providing filmmakers with greater control over the final product.Topaz Labs developed a video upscaling AI tool that sharpens fuzzy footage, promising “tack-sharp 4K at buttery-smooth 60 fps.” Additional Topaz Video AI (TVAI) enhancement capabilities include deinterlacing and motion interpolationWhat’s not to like about AI-powered upscaling tools that can rescue fuzzy footage from the trash heap? Especially when you can save an amazing performance if the focus was soft.  Audio mixing has never been easier than with tools like Izotope’s Neutron software which has both Track Assistant and Mix Assistant. The Track Assistant, in particular, automatically generates custom presets that make your track sound as good as possible. It may not be perfect, but audio mixers use it as a starting point and then perfect it from there. 2. SCRIPTWRITING AND STORYTELLINGAI has also found its place in the early blueprint stages of the filmmaking process. AI-based software can analyze vast amounts of data, including scripts, books, and movies, to generate plotlines, characters, and dialogue. While AI-generated scripts might not match the depth of human creativity, they can serve as valuable starting points, helping filmmakers explore new ideas and brainstorm fresh concepts.??Filmmaker Jon Finger created his short film D.A.N. using A.I.-generated images and video. One day, Finger was playing with GPT-4 and asked it to make him a viral tweet. It responded with “Woke up in a lab and I’m an AI. What does this mean?” The premise immediately struck him. At the moment, Finger is not excited about language models writing his scripts. He rather enjoys playing with the ideas they can generate. So, he still ultimately wrote the script but used the A.I., Gen2 from Runway, and generated the individual shots to build up the scenes that he had written.Every shot is generated from A.I., from text to video. Although, Finger notes the process isn’t streamlined. He compares it to a blind millionaire photographer asking his assistant for help — but the caveat is that the assistant doesn’t speak English very well. So, basically, you type the shot you want and often get back images that don’t reflect your imagination. Then, you change the language a bit and re-generate the image.3. VFX AND ANIMATIONCreating stunning visual effects (VFX) and realistic animations often require significant time and resources. AI tools can streamline this process by automating tasks such as rotoscoping, motion tracking, and compositing. By harnessing machine learning algorithms, filmmakers can reduce the production time and costs associated with VFX, making it more accessible for independent filmmakers and smaller production companies.Runway developed an especially useful AI tool that allows filmmakers to mask and rotoscope at record speeds without the tedium of scrubbing frame-by-frame. It still may not be perfect in terms of giving filmmakers control options but all footage is exportable as chroma colors, alpha channels, and video.4. AUDIENCE ANALYSIS AND MARKETINGAI technology can analyze vast amounts of data from social media, online platforms, and viewer demographics to provide insights into audience preferences. This information allows filmmakers to tailor their content to specific target audiences, improve marketing strategies, and increase engagement. AI-powered recommendation systems also play a crucial role in suggesting films and shows to viewers, helping them discover content that aligns with their interests.IMPLICATIONS OF AI TECHNOLOGY FOR THE FUTURE OF FILMMAKING AND HOLLYWOOD 2.0All of the advancements in AI tools will transform the film industry into what Runway CEO Cris Valenzuela dubs Hollywood. 2.0. Runway is the company behind the cutting-edge AI tools that helped create the many worlds of the Oscar-winning film, Everything Everywhere All At Once. The impact of AI technology is already being felt all the way down to The Late Show where it streamlines creative workflows to meet the high demand for content. Now, let’s take a look at the implications of AI tools in the future of filmmaking.  INCREASED EFFICIENCY AND COST REDUCTIONAI tools can automate repetitive and time-consuming tasks, allowing filmmakers to focus on creativity and storytelling. By accelerating the editing, VFX, and animation processes, AI technology saves time and reduces production costs. This makes filmmaking more accessible to emerging talents and independent filmmakers, fostering a more diverse and inclusive film industry. There’s now an AI tool that makes color grading a breeze. Colourlab.Ai provides incredible color intelligence and with its ML capabilities, it learns the key frames from the human colorist, saving plenty of time while color grading. With this powerful tool, filmmakers can balance all the cameras with just one click, create AI references with pre-loaded smart LUTs, auto-group shots together, and color-match shots from different cameras.  Descript is another AI tool that helps streamline the post-production process. It’s essentially like a new way to edit. A text-based video editing tool, Descript digests footage and generates text transcripts. Then if you make an edit in the text, it’s automatically made in the video footage as well. This is great for breaking footage into chunks and removing unwanted sound checks along with “ums” during interviews. ENHANCED CREATIVITY AND COLLABORATIONAI tools provide filmmakers with new creative possibilities and collaborative opportunities. By automating certain processes, AI frees up time for filmmakers to explore innovative ideas and experiment with storytelling techniques. Additionally, AI-powered collaboration platforms facilitate remote teamwork, allowing filmmakers to collaborate across geographical boundaries and bring together diverse talents. The Insta360 is one such innovative device that streamlines pre-production while keeping all department heads on the same page. Cinematographer Shane Hurlbut, ASC pioneered the use of the Insta360 for tech and location scouts during the pandemic. It requires fewer people to attend the scouts and then in the Insta360 Studio app, filmmakers can navigate virtually, get measurements, and communicate with one another. ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS AND CHALLENGESUltimately, AI technology serves as a great tool for filmmakers, whether it’s as a solid starting point or to quickly take care of tedious tasks. As AI technology continues to advance, ethical considerations become paramount. Filmmakers must navigate questions related to data privacy, biases, and the potential displacement of jobs in the industry. Striking a balance between human creativity and AI assistance is crucial to ensure that AI technology remains a tool rather than a replacement for artistic expression and human talent.Finger affirms that AI is not free of human intervention — at least at the moment:“Right now is a scary moment,” says Finger, “because the stuff it can do are jobs a creative person is doing and if replaced, they have nowhere else to go…. That’s assuming nothing changes. But as things move forward, to me, it looks like this is going to turn into a situation — sort of like what YouTube did with distribution — anyone can go out and be seen by the world. But the benefit to production is that some animator can have a vision they’re excited about and they don’t have to listen to a bunch of other people talk about what they can and cannot do. They can go make the film they want to make, or even make a whole series or game or whatever on the level of what would be a multi-million dollar level otherwise.”According to technologist and industry pundit Philip Hodgetts, AI and machine learning tools will “amplify your creativity.” And not only that but make it available to people who never had the opportunity to express themselves through the art form. Hodgetts puts it succinctly, “Let’s be very clear: Tools are not competition.” THE BOTTOM LINEAs filmmakers, we must understand the latest technology and open ourselves up to learn how it can improve our storytelling. This is certainly the case with AI tools. Of course, there are pros and cons to new technologies, and that’s also the case for AI tools. It’s far from the end-all, be-all. So, don’t expect ChatGPT to spit out a perfect script or Colourlab.Ai to grade your film to the extent of David Cole. But for a starting point or skipping past hours of tedium, AI tools are impressively useful. The best thing you can do as a filmmaker and stay ahead of your competition is to cross-train and understand the departments around you. That way, you will be irreplaceable when new technology comes along to replace menial tasks. https://www.filmmakersacademy.com/blog-how-ai-video-tools-are-changing-the-film-industry-2023/