Film and Entertainment Industry in Hong KongOverview* Hong Kong has one of the largest and most dynamic film industries in the world. The city is one of the Asia-Pacific region’s major centres for the production of film and television content and has captured a sizeable share of the regional market, particularly in mainland China.* While the mainland market has opened up for film co-production and is signing more agreements with overseas counterparts, Hong Kong remains its primary co-production partner. In 2023, 60 out of the 77 applications for film co-production approved by the National Radio and Television Administration (NRTA) were for movie projects between Hong Kong and mainland filmmakers.* The Hong Kong International Film & TV Market (FILMART) is Asia’s leading content marketplace. It has taken place online, providing a virtual content trading and meeting platform for industry players during the Covid-19 crisis. Over 7,300 delegates from 41 countries and regions attended the four-day event in March 2023. More than 330 exhibitors at FILMART were from mainland China.* Hong Kong's audio-visual services industry has gained preferential access to the mainland’s huge entertainment media market under the Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement (CEPA). Following the implementation of the CEPA agreement concerning the mainland’s Specific Commitments on Liberalisation of Trade in Services for Hong Kong in 2016, an Amendment Agreement was introduced which included new liberalisation measures for motion pictures (film) and television industries. This came into effect on 1 June 2020.* Service Providers* Most local film companies deal directly with cinema chains for local screening on a revenuesharing basis. Rights will then be sold to distribution companies for other forms of release, including video rental and sales and television broadcasting. With video streaming becoming increasingly popular, local film companies are also selling rights to streaming video ondemand (SVoD) providers such as Netflix. There are also companies that specialise in distributing foreign films in Hong Kong.* The film industry is represented by several associations, including the Movie Producers and Distributors Association of Hong Kong Ltd (MPDA), the Motion Picture Industry Association (MPIA), the Hong Kong Film Directors’ Guild (HKFDG) and the Hong Kong Screenwriters’ Guild (HKSWG).* ndustry Development and Market Outlook* Film Distribution * According to the film industry analysts Gower Street Analytics, global box office revenue is estimated to have reached US$33.9 bn (HK$265.2 bn) in 2023, a 30.5% increase from the year before. However, despite this growth, the industry has not yet fully recovered to prepandemic levels. Taking into account the impact of the prolonged 100day Hollywood writers and actors strikes in 2023, and its effect on the movie production and release calendar, global box office revenue is projected to drop to US$31.5 bn in 2024.* In Hong Kong, films intended for public exhibition have to be examined and classified by censors in accordance with the Film Censorship Ordinance established on 10 November 1988, and with the amendments added after that date. Following the implementation of the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Safeguarding National Security in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region on 30 June 2021, the Film Censorship Ordinance 2021 and the administrative guidelines were amended. The changes came into effect on 5 November 2021. Film producers and distributors can seek nonbinding preproduction advice from the Film Censorship Authority (which is the Director of Film, Newspaper and Article Administration).* According to Hong Kong Box Office Limited, 60 cinemas were operating in Hong Kong as of December 2023, up from 45 at the end of 2013. In Hong Kong, films are mainly released through channels such as Broadway Circuit, Emperor Cinemas, Golden Harvest Cinemas, Newport Circuit, MCL Circuit, Cine-Art House, Golden Scene Cinema and Cinema City Circuit. A list of cinemas operating in Hong Kong can be found here. Other movie distribution channels include Bluray discs, DVDs, broadcasting by local free television, pay television, subscription satellite services and SVoD platforms such as Netflix, Disney+, Amazon, HBO Go, Hulu, Fox+, hmvod and Apple TV+.* Hong Kong’s local film industry is rebounding from the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic, with 46 movies being released in the city in 2023, up from 27 in 2022. The movie A Guilty Conscience (????) became the alltime top grossing local Chineselanguage film in Hong Kong, with box office revenue surpassing HK$100 mn. However, the wider cinema market in Hong Kong remains stuck far below prepandemic levels, with 2023 box office revenue just 25% up on 2022 when cinemas were subjected to Covid-19 related restrictions on occupancy rate. In 2021, Hong Kong audiovisual productionrelated services exports amounted to HK$276 mn.* Hong Kong's film industry is reliant on overseas revenue, given the limited size of the domestic market, with Asia accounting for the majority of foreign sales income. Mainland China has become a magnet for movies from Hong Kong. According to Gower Street Analytics, the mainland film market was the world’s second biggest film market in 2023, behind only North America. It accounted for more than 23% of global box office receipts.* While the mainland is opening up for film coproduction and signing agreements with a number of foreign countries, coproduction projects with Hong Kong remain the most common. Many highquality, critically acclaimed films have been produced through this cooperation. Recent examples include Detective VS Sleuths (????) directed by KaFai Wai (???), Anita (???) directed by Longman Leung (???), and Better Days (????), directed by Derek Tsang (???).* There were only 6 NRTAapproved film coproductions in 2022, but in 2023 there were 77 film coproduction applications approved by the NRTA(60 of them involving Hong Kong and mainland China). That figure is still just below the 78 coproduction applications approved in 2019, but it is clear that the 2023 figure signals a revival in Chinese and foreign coproductions.* Hong Kong's films have earned international recognition over many years. It is not uncommon to see Hong Kong movies being chosen as the opening or closing movies at worldclass film festivals. Examples include Anita (???) at the 26th Busan International Film Festival and Keep Rolling (?????) at the 16th Osaka Asian Film Festival in 2021.* In order to maintain longterm competitiveness, it is essential that talented young directors, writers, producers, editors come through. Nick Cheuk (???) won the Best New Director Award at the Golden Horse Awards 2023 with his film Time Still Turns The Pages (????). Wong Chun (??) won same award in 2016 with his debut feature Mad World (????).* As well as buying rights for theatrical distribution, overseas filmproduction companies are also interested in acquiring rights to remake Hong Kong movies. Examples include South Korean remakes Believer (????, released in 2018) and Mujeogja (????????, released in 2010), and the 2006 Oscarwinning movie The Departed (?????), remade by Martin Scorsese (??????) from 2002’s Infernal Affairs(???). The South Korean remake The Plot, from Hong Kong action movie Accident (??), has completed filming and is set for release in 2024.* Many Hong Kong professionals have managed to become wellknown in both the eastern and western movie markets. Tony Leung (???) became the first Chinese actor to win the Venice Film Festival lifetime achievement award in 2023. Other examples include Louis Koo (???), who was awarded his first Best Actor Award after 25 years of making movies at the 12th AFA, and Kara Hui (???), who was presented with the Excellence in Asian Cinema Award. Further afield in Hollywood, Yuen Wooping is one of the best known Chinese martialarts movie choreographers due to his involvement in The Matrix (????????), while Chow Yunfat (???), Cory Yuen (??), Donnie Yen (???), Jackie Chan (??), John Woo (???), Johnnie To, Michelle Yeoh (???), Ronny Yu (???), Sammo Hung, Tsui Hark, Wong Karwai (???) and Wilson Yip (???) are also familiar Hong Kong names who have successfully straddled the eastern and western markets.* While major film companies have their own distribution departments, smaller independent filmmakers usually rely on distribution companies to sell their offerings in overseas markets. Key channels for international distribution are the three main film markets in Los Angeles, Cannes and Berlin, where producers, distributors and buyers meet to initiate deals for the distribution of films. In 2023, the Hong Kong Trade Development Council organised the Hong Kong Pavilion, showcasing the latest Hong Kong film productions at the Marché du Film in Cannes (????????) – the first time it has appeared there since 2019.* Given its strong cinematic tradition, Hong Kong is well positioned to be the gateway to the Asian film industry. Since 1997, Hong Kong has hosted an annual film market to promote the city as an international film distribution centre in the region. FILMART is Asia’s biggest film and entertainment event and is well known for new film launches, networking activities and professional seminars. Now in its 28th year, the Fair is widely recognised as a powerful platform from which to explore coproduction in Asia. In March 2023, FILMART attracted more than 7,300 international buyers from 41 countries and regions, and hosted over 700 exhibitors at the fourday event. In 2019, Hong Kong was selected by the Festival de Cannes as the first Asian city to host the Festival de Cannes Film Week thanks to its unique position as a regional film trading hub.* Hong Kong is also a popular place for film crews from Hollywood, and also from other Asian countries, to shoot commercial films, TV programmes and advertisements. Recent examples include American drama series Expats (released in 2024), American monster film Godzilla vs. Kong (2021), South Korean action horror heist film Peninsula (2020), Japanese drama series Confidence Man JP (2019) and Singaporean reality show Asia’s Got Talent (?????) (2017).* Virtual production enables filmmakers to produce, conceptualise and execute their creative visions in a different way from traditional filmmaking methods. According to market analysts Grand View Research, the global virtual production market was worth US$2.1 bn in 2023, and is projected to grow to US$6.79 bn by 2030. This is due to the adoption and advancement of technologies such as extended reality, virtual reality, and other virtual production technologies. These technologies have revolutionised the filmmaking process by offering new tools and techniques for bringing stories to life on screen and more immersive experiences for audiences. There are startups and film production houses in Hong Kong that specialise in virtual production and they are set to expand into the mainland and other Asian markets.* Television Programmes* Hong Kong TV companies derive a substantial portion of their revenue from overseas markets, targeting primarily Chinesespeaking populations. In addition, some programmes are dubbed into other languages to target non Chinesespeaking audiences. Hong Kong's television broadcasters sell their products using programme licensing, prepackaged programme content and subscription fees. While satellite distribution and landing rights remain the most important sources of revenue, video streaming on SVoD platforms such as Netflix is becoming increasingly promising.* There are four licensees offering domestic free television programme services in Hong Kong – i-CABLE HOY Limited (formerly known as Fantastic TV), HK Television Entertainment Company Limited (HKTVE), Television Broadcasts Limited (TVB) and Radio Television Hong Kong (RTHK) – delivering free TV services via frequency spectrum and/or fixed network. TV broadcasts in Hong Kong have been fully digital since 1 December 2020. Domestic pay TV services in Hong Kong are provided by PCCW Media Limited. The number of pay TV channels has dropped from 339 in 2022 to 221 as of 1 February 2024, following the termination of HKCTV ‘s pay TV services from 1 June 2023.* Mobile viewing platforms have recently emerged in Hong Kong as an important distribution channel for TV content. Most of the latest TVB programmes are available on the mobile application platform myTV Super, which is the largest overthetop (OTT) platform in Hong Kong with 10.4 million registered users as of June 2023.* Other players include ViuTV, the channel run by HKTVE and launched in April 2016, which offers freetoair broadcast and mediaondemand streaming services on mobile devices; Asia Television Digital Media Limited (ATV), which, after going off air in April 2016, launched a mobile app in January 2018 to continue broadcasting through OTT services; HOY TV, the free TV channel run by i-CABLE HOY Limited, formerly Fantastic Television Limited, and on air since May 2017; global streaming giant Netflix, which rolled out its OTT service in Hong Kong in January 2016; and Disney+, which launched in Hong Kong on 16 November 2021.* The popularity of OTT platforms means they are becoming increasingly important channels for local television broadcast companies looking to increase their overseas revenue. By the end of 2022, over 40,000 hours of TVB content were available on TVB Anywhere. In the same year, ViuTV’s sister company Viu OTT saw the number of its paid subscribers soar by 45% to 12.2 million and expanded its OTT Business to more than 170 markets.* Mainland China, as one of the world’s largest markets for entertainment and media businesses, has experienced growing demand for quality programme content alongside a surge in the number of TV and cable channels. Landing rights have been granted to Hong Kong's TV broadcasters to provide entertainment to millions of homes on the mainland, and much wider access for Hong Kongmainland coproduced television programmes is provided for under CEPA.* Supports to the Film Industry* The Hong Kong government established the Hong Kong Film Development Council (HKFDC) in 2007 to advise on policy, strategy and institutional arrangements for the promotion and development of the film industry, as well as the use of public funds. In 2009, it also established Create Hong Kong (CreateHK) – a dedicated agency under the Commerce and Economic Development Bureau to lead, champion and drive the development of the city’s creative economy.* In 2019, in order to build a healthy ecosystem for the film industry, the Hong Kong government put HK$1 bn into the Film Development Fund (FDF) – the largest injection of money since the fund’s inception in 1999. It also implemented five new or enhanced measures to pep up the industry amid the Covid-19 pandemic, including a Director’s Succession Scheme, a Scriptwriting Incubation Programme and free shortterm advanced training courses. By the end of October 2023, a total of 61 applications for Financing Film Production, 10 applications for Film Production Grants, 9 applications for Directors’ Succession Scheme and 24 projects for the First Feature Film Initiative had been approved, while 284 other filmrelated projects had also been given the green light. By the end of October 2023, the FDF had approved around HK$1.058 bn to support local film production projects.* In its 2023 Policy Address, the government proposed putting another HK$4.3 bn into the FDF and the CreateSmart Initiative, as well as launching two new initiatives under the FDF  the Filming Financing Scheme for Mainland Market and the Hong Kong-Europe-Asia Film Collaboration Funding Scheme. These schemes are designed to support investment and Hong Kong films looking to enter the mainland and international film markets.* CEPA Provisions* CEPA provisions include significant market liberalisation measures for Hong Kong’s audiovisual services industry, regarding cinema theatre services, film distribution services, technical services for cable television and the production of television drama programmes and films. By the end of January 2024, the Hong Kong government had certified 98 audiovisual service companies as Hong Kong service suppliers (??????????) (HKSSs).* CEPA makes it easier for Hong Kong companies to operate wholly owned units involved in cinema construction and renovation, allowing them to construct or renovate more than one cinema theatre at more than one location for the screening of films. Many Hong Kong companies have set up cinemas, including flagship multiplex cinemas, in mainland cities. Furthermore, Hong Kong companies engaged in film distribution services can, on a pilot basis, establish wholly owned units to distribute mainland motion pictures and Hong Kongmainland coproduced movies. Meanwhile, Chineselanguage films produced by Hong Kong companies approved by mainland authorities are not subject to the import quota set for foreign films, while Hong Kongmainland coproduced films are treated as mainland productions.* The Agreement on Trade in Services (ATIS) under CEPA, which came into effect in January 2016, allows Hong Kong companies wider access to the mainland market in terms of providing Chineselanguage motion pictures, jointlyproduced films and TV dramas, and technical services for cable television. Approved television dramas coproduced by Hong Kong and the mainland can be broadcast and distributed in the same way as mainland television dramas, without restrictions on the quantities and the times of the broadcasts.* The Agreement Concerning Amendment to the Mainland and Hong Kong Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement (CEPA) Agreement on Trade in Services (Amendment Agreement), which came into effect on 1 June 2020, has introduced new liberalisation measures for motion pictures (film) and television industries. These measures include:* Motion Pictures (Film)* For motion pictures coproduced by Hong Kong and the mainland, there will be no restriction on the percentage of Hong Kong principal creative personnel and artists or mainlandrelated content. Fees for establishing mainland and Hong Kong coproduction motionpicture projects will also be waived.* Television* There will be no restriction on the quantity of Hong Kongproduced television dramas and animation TV programmes imported by television stations, audiovisual websites and cable television networks on the mainland.https://research.hktdc.com/en/article/MzExMjc4NDIzHow Hong Kong’s Film Industry Made a Surprise ComebackSpring has arrived. For the Hong Kong film industry, the harsh three-year-long winter of the COVID era — with multiplexes forced to close for extended periods, industry professionals losing their livelihoods, and an indifferent administration that didn’t deign to lift a finger to help this once-mighty cultural industry that put the auteurs from the tiny former colony into the annals of global cinematic history — has finally come to an end. Despite cinemas reopening their doors only in April 2022, two Hong Kong-made films released in late 2022, Warriors of Future and Table for Six, have become the top-grossing local productions of all time, taking in $10.5 million and $10 million in Hong Kong, respectively. And a third, A Guilty Conscience, released this January, is now the highest-earning Hong Kong film ever, grossing $11 million in its first three weeks of release. Hongkongers have rediscovered their love for homegrown films that tell stories they can relate to, and all is suddenly looking well.At this opportune time, Hong Kong Filmart is returning to an in-person format after three virtual editions, hoping to reclaim its position as the largest film market in Asia. Local superstars, legendary directors and glittering new productions will be presented at the Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Centre once again during Filmart, which runs March 13-16. But what has rekindled the love affair between Hong Kong films and Hongkongers in a market that has been dominated by Hollywood imports for over two decades? In 2022, five homegrown releases managed to secure a spot on the year-end box office top 10, up against such stiff competition as Avatar: The Way of Water and Top Gun: Maverick. The icing on the cake is that Warriors of Future and A Guilty Conscience were helmed by first-time directors, Ng Yuen-fai and Jack Ng, respectively.“Hong Kong films’ recent performance at the local box office is hugely encouraging,” multihyphenate Josie Ho, founder of 852 Films, tells THR. “Especially seeing that they are the work of first-time directors, who are introducing new viewpoints and storytelling techniques, that is a shot in the arm for the local film industry.”“The Hong Kong audience’s support for local productions is at a high in recent history,” adds Mandy Lam, general manager of sales and acquisitions of Edko Films, the company behind top earners A Guilty Conscience and Table for Six. “As long as a local film gains word-of-mouth and becomes a topic of discussion, the audience is much more willing to go see it at the cinema than before.”Some believe the Hong Kong audience had grown fatigued with Hollywood superhero fare. “It’s probably because the foreign imports in recent years, especially the Hollywood superhero blockbusters, were mainly special effects-driven. There wasn’t too much variation, so the audience wants films that are narrative-driven,” says Jason Siu, general manager of production and project development of Emperor Motion Pictures, which reps the star-studded Once Upon a Time in Hong Kong with Shang Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings’ Tony Leung and Under Current at Filmart 2023. “Meanwhile, local productions have raised the bar in scriptwriting, filming technique and production value,” he adds. “Coupled with the devoted fandoms of local idols, the public is paying more attention and supporting more native films.”Adds Lam, “Apart from the obvious rise in quality, which the audience is aware of, they also appreciate the fact that these are stories they can relate to and have local relevance. Moreover, as streaming platforms proliferate, many people are already subscribing to Netflix or Disney+ at home, the range of foreign films and the variety of content they have access to without going to the cinema have significantly increased. Whereas comparatively, they can only see first-run Hong Kong films in theaters, which is another contributing factor to the boost in popularity of homegrown films.”But a minuscule, albeit overpopulated, city cannot sustain a flourishing film industry on its own. “If Hong Kong cinema is to return to its heyday of the 1980s, what it needs is overseas markets,” Ho emphasizes. “Hong Kong films were huge in the 1980s because they sold very well overseas and were enormously popular in Japan, South Korea and Southeast Asia, which earned it the moniker ‘Hollywood of the East.’ Thus, Hong Kong cinema must reclaim its overseas markets and extend its reach beyond Hong Kong. It would be best if it can break into the U.S. and European markets, but we should at least get back the Southeast Asian markets. Only when we have the overseas markets will we get more investors and more productions.” Ho’s Edge of the World, which will be presented to international buyers at Filmart 2023, has already lined up a wide release in Malaysia in March.Propitiously, Hong Kong films are beginning to enjoy a revival not only locally, but in some traditional markets and even new markets as well. A Guilty Conscience is indicative of the trend, insiders say. A legal drama with nary a car chase or explosion, the film, starring Hong Kong comedian turned cultural icon Dayo Wong, is billed as Lunar New Year entertainment because of its release date. People of Chinese descent across Asia have the habit of ushering in the Chinese New Year with a trip to the cinema for some collective mirth. Although not at all cheery, this gripping tale of a lawyer’s redemption for causing an innocent client’s unjust imprisonment was accepted as a Lunar New Year offering across Southeast Asia and especially struck a chord in Malaysia, topping the Malaysian box office with a respectable take of over $1.85 million to date.The courtroom thriller with Cantonese dialogue is also enjoying a theatrical run in 34 cinemas across the U.K., having raked in over $154,000 in three weeks so far. Hong Kong industry veterans say the uncommon U.K. launch was designed to tap into the Hong Kong diaspora surge since 2021, which has seen over 150,000 Hongkongers immigrate to the British Isles. “Distributors in the U.K. understand that there is a demand from the Hong Kong diaspora to continue their Lunar New Year moviegoing tradition, as well as simply a demand for Hong Kong films — so more of the established distributors are inclined to put Hong Kong titles in cinemas,” says Lam. The film has also been released theatrically in the U.S., Canada, Australia and New Zealand, all popular destinations for emigrating Hongkongers. True-crime drama The Sparring Partner, released in November 2022 in the U.K., was also part of this phenomenon.The story-driven dramas that are spearheading the great revival of Hong Kong cinema are, ironically, a product of the pandemic. During the days of a marooned Hong Kong resulting from the stringent quarantine restrictions required by the government — seven to 21 days in quarantine for inbound travelers, a policy that was enforced for over two years — production budgets were under pressure. “The pandemic affected overseas shoots, and even local filming was often interrupted or suspended, especially at the height of infections,” Siu points out. “The schedules were extended, driving up the costs. Some of our productions had planned overseas shoots in Malaysia or Russia. But because we couldn’t go abroad, and the scripts couldn’t be changed either, we had to resort to using special effects to present or save the scenes, which naturally caused the budget to shoot up.”But the legendary hustle of the Hong Kong film community has never been deterred by budgetary constraints or production challenges. “Hong Kong filmmakers are an adaptable bunch,” observes Lam. “While some of the projects might have been developed before the pandemic, filmmakers have also taken into account the restrictions and no overseas filming to focus on stories that could be told and could happen within Hong Kong.”Some even had the gumption to invite foreign help to come to Hong Kong while the gates to the city were largely locked. For 852 Films’ English-language Mother Tongue, a Hong Kong film with a difference, producer and lead Ho invited director Mike Figgis (Leaving Las Vegas) to the city to take the helm in 2021. The Figgis-directed thriller will make its debut at Filmart in March. Taking Hong Kong’s dialing code as its name, 852 Films’ stated mission is to produce English-language features from Hong Kong for the global audience, as well as Cantonese-language films with local flavor. “I will make films in Hong Kong as much as I can,” Ho says. Mother Tongue was made in Hong Kong, standing in for Los Angeles. “I want to give the filmmakers in Hong Kong as many working opportunities as I can. If a film is set in Hong Kong, of course, it will be shot here. But even if a film is set elsewhere, and not targeting a local audience, I’d also want to make it in Hong Kong if possible.”So what comes next for the buzzing Hong Kong film scene? Emperor Motion Pictures has a couple of features that will be filmed outside of Hong Kong, including one set for production in Malaysia and another, Priceless Game, which will be shot in Japan. As the border between Hong Kong and China has also reopened, a Chinese-led production it is producing will film in Hong Kong.Film companies should also benefit from the rousing support of the local audience in terms of investments. https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-features/hong-kong-film-industry-comeback-berlin-1235326295/Challenges of the film industry in Hong Kong* After a prolonged downturn for almost two decades since the early 1990s, the local film industry has stabilized in recent years, buoyed in part by the preferential access to the huge film market in the Mainland under the Closer Economic Partnership Arrangements ("CEPA").1Legend symbol denoting Under CEPA, filmmakers in Hong Kong are granted preferential access to the Mainland market which is not available to other foreign companies. The key provisions include (a) Chinese language films produced by Hong Kong companies and approved by Mainland authorities are not subject to the import quota set for foreign films, currently stands at 34 a year under the revenue sharing model; (b) films co-produced by Hong Kong and the Mainland are treated as Mainland productions, provided that one-third of the major cast are Mainlanders; (c) Hong Kong companies are allowed to set up wholly-owned units in constructing or renovating cinemas for film-screening business; and (d) Hong Kong films in Cantonese can be distributed in Guangdong via designated channels, with improved profit sharing arrangement. Under CEPA, while local movies entirely produced by Hong Kong companies can be exempt from the import quota set for foreign movies in the Mainland, Hong Kong-Mainland co-production can also be distributed as domestic movies in the Mainland. In view of the robust trend growth of around 40% in the film market in the Mainland over the past decade, Hong Kong-Mainland co-production now takes up more than half of the movies produced by Hong Kong film makers.* Film industry is one of the six creative industries in Hong Kong and the Government has since 1999 established the Film Development Fund ("FDF")2Legend symbol denoting FDF was launched in 1999 to finance projects conducive to the long-term development of the film industry, but its scope was expanded in 2007 to provide financial support for production of small-to-medium budget films. The ceiling of production budget of these films under support was raised from HK$5 million to HK$25 million in 2015. As at March 2015, FDF provided a total of some HK$83 million for partial financial support to production of 30 films, assisting 29 local talents in taking up the position of directors and producers for the first time in commercial film production. to foster its development. In the 2016 Policy Address, the Chief Executive declares "encouraging more local film production, nurturing new talent, building up audiences and promoting the Hong Kong film brand" as his policy targets. The 2016-2017 Budget includes two funding measures for the film industry, namely injecting additional HK$200 million to FDF and providing a publicity subsidy of HK$20 million to assist Hong Kong-produced Cantonese films to enter the Guangdong market.* However, there are concerns that these measures are too modest for a strong recovery in the local film industry, as discussed in the earlier meetings of the Panel on Information Technology and Broadcasting. Members are concerned about a lack of long-term policy on local film development and insufficient provision of local cinemas.3Legend symbol denoting The subject of film development was discussed at the Panel meeting held on 9 March 2015. This issue of Essentials reviews the development of the local film industry in recent decades, followed by a brief discussion on its challenges in the short to medium term.* To a certain extent, the protracted downturn in the local film industry since the early 1990s could be attributable in part to the cyclical weakness in the Hong Kong economy. Yet more importantly, this setback was also precipitated by the following structural developments in the film entertainment market: (a)Shrinking number of cinema seats: Spurred by the buoyant property market and facing increasing competition from home video entertainment such as VCDs and DVDs, many big local cinemas have been demolished for development into more lucrative residential and commercial buildings. In 2015, there were only 47 cinemas left with 37 800 available seats, down by 60% and 70% compared with 119 cinemas and 122 000 seats in 1993. This inevitably has a strong adverse impact on the overall box office in Hong Kong. (b)Crowded out by foreign movies: Local audiences have been increasingly attracted to imported movies especially the big-budget Hollywood movies, in line with the viewing preference of audiences elsewhere. As a result, the box office of foreign movies in Hong Kong increased four-folds over the past two decades to HK$1,602 million in 2015, quadrupling their share in the overall box office of Hong Kong from around 20% in 1992 to about 80% in 2015. By contrast, the share of Hong Kong movies plunged from around 80% to around 20% over the same period (Figure 1 above). (c)Weakening overseas appetite for Hong Kong movies: Overseas box office used to be an important revenue source of Hong Kong movies in the 1980s and 1990s, especially from Taiwan, South Korea and Southeast Asia. Yet overseas appetite for Hong Kong movies likewise waned since the early 1990s, as overseas audiences were drawn to Hollywood movies as well. It is estimated that the overseas box office for Hong Kong movies (excluding the Mainland market) plunged by more than 80% from a peak of HK$1,860 million in 1992 to just around HK$300 million in 2014.5Legend symbol denoting See?????????????and Hong Kong Film Development Council (2015). (d)Rampant film piracy activity: Worse still, pirated VCDs and DVDs had severely undermined the business receipts of local film makers in the 1990s. According to an estimate made by the trade in 1998, piracy had resulted in a 30% drop in box offices, causing a loss of some HK$300 million to the local film industry. This loss would widen to HK$1 billion if overseas distribution was also included.6Legend symbol denoting See GovHK (1998). In the more recent years, although film piracy through VCDs and DVDs seems to have subsided, there are concerns over infringement of film copyright on the Internet such as through illegal streaming platforms.Rising importance of co-production after CEPA implementation* The local film industry began to bottom out after the implementation of CEPA, supported by the booming box office in the Mainland which witnessed a 20-fold surge within a decade to RMB$44 billion (HK$54.2 billion) in 2015. As this market is about 27 times that of Hong Kong, it has widened considerably the market horizon of local film makers. In addition, Hong Kong-Mainland co-production can also widen the sources of investment funds of local film makers on the one hand, and create more job opportunities for local talents on the other. The contribution of co-produced movies to the film business in Hong Kong can be manifested in the following indicators: (a)Co-production accounting for half of Hong Kong movies: The annual number of co-production with Mainland partners has gone up sharply, from about 10 before 2004 to about 25-30 during the period 2010-2014. Compared with the annual production of 43-56 Hong Kong movies produced, co-production persistently accounts for a share of more than 50% in recent years.7Legend symbol denoting See Commerce and Economic Development Bureau (2015). (b)Co-production commanding better box office in Hong Kong: Co-produced movies are generally better received in local box office, due in part to bigger production budget and more attractive cast. In 2014, there were 27 co-produced movies screened in Hong Kong, commanding a combined box office of HK$234 million, twice the respective sum of HK$115 million for those 23 local movies produced by Hong Kong companies.8Legend symbol denoting See??????(2014). (c)Co-production taking up one-seventh of the box office in the Mainland: Co-produced movies are likewise well-received across the boundary, as the movie stars and filming techniques of Hong Kong are still highly valued by Chinese audiences. In 2014, co-produced movies had a combined box office of RMB$4.1 billion (HK$5.1 billion) in 2014, accounting for 14% of the overall box office in the Mainland.* In line with this stabilization, the business performance9Legend symbol denoting In the compilation of business performance statistics, film industry covers motion picture, video and television programme production, sound recording and music publishing activities. See Census and Statistics Department (2015a). of the local film industry improved over the past decade.  First, the number of business establishments of the local film and related industries expanded by a cumulative 33% during 2005-2014, while business receipts also went up by 25%.  Secondly, the number of persons working in these industries rose by a total of 38% to almost 9 000 persons in 2014.  Thirdly, the value-added contribution of these industries surged by 75% to HK$2.5 billion in 2014. By and large, they account for 0.1% of overall GDP and 0.2% of total employment in Hong Kong.Challenges of the local film industry in the short to medium term* Looking ahead, it is expected that the colossal film market in the Mainland will continue to be the key focus of the local film industry, but it is not without challenges. First, film makers in the Mainland are more sophisticated and self-sufficient in film making and this may reduce the opportunities for co-production with Hong Kong film makers over time. In fact, Mainland filmmakers can shoot big budget and quality movies themselves now. For instance, the number of Hong Kong-Mainland co-production in the top 10 domestic movies in the Mainland in terms of box office has dwindled progressively in recent years, from seven in 2012 to only two in 2014.10Legend symbol denoting See Commerce and Economic Development Bureau (2015b). This gives rise to the concerns whether overall Hong Kong movies and its filming crew can sustain its competitiveness across the boundary in the medium term.* Secondly, Hong Kong movies need to face intensifying competition from foreign movies especially from Hollywood. By virtue of its attractive cast and big production budget, foreign movies are under strong demand in the Mainland. While imported movies accounted for only 16% of the films commercially released for screening in the Mainland in 2015, they took up almost 40% of the overall box office.11Legend symbol denoting See the reports on box office released by the State Administration of Press, Radio, Film and Television in the Mainland in various years. Reportedly, import quota for foreign movies under the revenue sharing model is likely to be relaxed further in the next review scheduled for 2017, after a lift from 20 to 34 in 201212Legend symbol denoting To the most extent, foreign movies are imported to the Mainland through the revenue sharing model, with a quota initially fixed at 10 in the 1990s and subsequently increased to 34 in 2012. Foreign producers including Hollywood filmmakers can claim up to 25% of the box office under this model. This apart, the Mainland also imports around 30 foreign movies each year through buying the distribution rights at a flat rate. Hong Kong movies may need to improve the quality in order to maintain competitiveness against foreign movies. Moreover, in view of the decreasing trend of cinema seats available in Hong Kong, local movies face an uphill battle to compete with popular Hollywood movies for screening in local cinemas.