Women in Oppressive Societies as Portrayed in Kollywood Movies

Introduction
Women from lower castes who live in rural settings face a number of serious challenges, including discrimination, honor killings, and other violence and injustices against women. The following three Tamil movies describe some of the main issues, with a particular focus on the situation of tribal (Irula) and Dalit rural women in Tamil Nadu. The word ※caste§ is derived from Portuguese and means lineage. According to Moffatt ([1979] 2015), the word ※caste§ has been described with two ancient Indian concepts, j芋ti (clan or community) and varna (occupation). The caste system is a major problem today because it divides people on the basis of caste and creates unncessary conflict (Aslam 1990). A sharp partisan divide is etched in Indian society, pitting those who believe in the caste system against those who do not. Nevertheless, it persists in Tamil Nadu.
More than 165 million Indians have been discriminated against and treated cruelly because of their caste, an attribute established by birth regardless of the faith one holds. Caste-ism is a rigid social structure based on descent and occupation. Social interactions are all affected by caste divisions in India, which are exacerbated by practices and threats of physical violence, economic boycotts, and social ostracism.
Here the emphasis is on ※untouchability,§ the imposition of social disabilities on persons because of their birth into a certain caste. Dalits, previously known as ※untouchables§ but now known as scheduled castes, face daily exploitation, violence, and discrimination from both the government and private actors in violation of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (the Convention, or ICERD). Despite its inability to implement these laws, which have supported and sometimes intensified violence against Dalits, India repeatedly relies on its numerous laws and policies as evidence that it has fulfilled its obligations to end caste-based discrimination.
Three movies that spotlight caste and the status of women in Tamil Nadu are Paradesi (Bala 2013), Mathayannaikooitam (Sugumaran 2013), and Jai Bhim (Gnanavel 2021). All three films examine the various social issues that women face on a daily basis in Indian society. These films are about the intersection of gender with caste and religion. They show how social rules force characters to make difficult decisions, even as society shifts to tackle some of the problems that women face.
Summaries of the Three Movies
Paradesi (2013) is a screen adaptation of Eriyum Panikadu [Red Tea], a Tamil translation of a novel written in 1969 by Paul Harris Daniel. It is based on real-life experiences of poor women in the 1930s, before Independence. The film focuses on tea plantation workers during the British regime. It describes the grim lives of poor, carefree villagers lured into working on tea plantations and how women and the plantation workers were forced to live their entire lives as slaves and how they faced sexual harassment and violence.
Madha Yaanai Koottam (2013) revolves around the family of Jayakkodi Thevar, who has two wives. The film begins with a death. The back stories of the characters are revealed to us by the troupe that performs at this funeral. The threat of another death always seems imminent, and, by the time that happens, the film has turned into a young man＊s struggle to defeat death, who stalks him obsessively. All of this happens only because a high-caste wife oppresses a second, low-caste wife.
The film Jai Bhim (2021) is inspired by a 1993 incident in which?a man from the Irula tribe was falsely framed in a theft case and died in police custody with evidence of having been tortured by the police. The death of this man, Rajakannu, led to a landmark legal case after the victim＊s wife, Sengani (real name Parvathi), goes to Chandru, a lawyer, for help. The police try to bribe both Chandru and Sengani to reach an out-of-court settlement.?Choosing to take up a legal career was an accident for Chandru so he could be active in student politics. A leader during the Left Movement, Chandru wanted to be in community service and help people. It was during the emergency years in the 1970s that he began to feel that the law should be a tool to win the rights of people.?In his long stint as a lawyer, Chandru disposed of 96,000 cases, a feat that he achieved only because of meticulous planning, organization, and classification of cases.
The American Journal of Economics and Sociology
Paradesi: Chained Survival of Women 
Any Shudra (peasant or commoner) woman can be sexually exploited by any man who is a member of one of the three higher castes: Brahmin (priestly caste), Kshatriya (warrior or king), or Vaishya (landowner or merchant). Even the murder of a Dalit woman is explicitly viewed by the Brahmins as a minor offense, comparable to the murder of an animal. That is the starting point for understanding the lives of Dalit women in India. 
The enslavement of women in the Tamil-speaking region of India persisted during the 19th century, but it was even worse than slavery in Europe and the Americas. Slavery in those areas involved the use of violence and physical restraints, such as chains. In India, by contrast, untouchability and restricive employment were the hidden chains that connected women slaves to their masters in Tamilspeaking areas. Tamil farm women appeared to be freer on the outside than slaves in the West. But, as Tamil poet Sekkizhaar puts it in his poem ※Thirunaalai Poovar Puranam§ (Hymn 13: 1每7): ※The permitted caste settlements of Parayars are taken as the right to food, which thus constitutes a sign of employment.§ In other words, one creates a slave merely by feeding a starving person. Those who accept food, a small piece of land to live on, and the designation as untouchable thereby can survive, but only as a slave. B. R. Ambedkar, the creator of India＊s constitution, considered untouchability a form of slavery, but he realized that the social stigma of it could not be eliminated with legislation. 
The movie Paradesi (Bala 2013) is based on a novel written by a medical officer on a tea plantation in Tamil Nadu. He directly observed the terrible treatment of the women picking tea. That included daily sexual harassment. 
In the movie, Rasaa lives in the village of Salur in 1939. He is a village kotangi, or soothsayer, but he actually makes a living by doing street work and begging. His grandmother is his only companion after he lost his father and mother. His neighbor Angamma teases him and ends up falling in love with Rasaa. But Angamma＊s family does not accept their love because they see Rasaa as being irresponsible and unfit for marriage.
Rasaa then seeks employment in a nearby community. He meets a kindly kangani (a tea estate supervisor), and they travel together back to Rasaa＊s village. The kangani provides labor for the British tea plantations. He promises the people in the village decent living quarters and great pay. Raasa, like many of the locals, joins the kangani in the hopes of sending money home every month to his bedridden grandmother. Angamma and Rassa＊s grandmother both are emotionally affected by his departure. 
After a 48-day trek, they reach the tea estate only to find that not all is as promised: the kangani and his lackey rule the plantation with an iron fist. On the estate, Maragadham lives with her two-and-a-halfyear-old daughter. Her husband was the only tea worker who has ever escaped. Maragadham becomes Raasa＊s friend. Raasa receives a letter from his grandmother informing him that Angamma has left home because her family found out about her pregnancy. 
Rasaa does not have enough money to leave. His daily wage is spent on food and lodging. It will take him six months to leave. Maragadham is in an even worse position. She is required to work for both her time and the time required to pay off her husband＊s contract. This is the kind of economic oppression Dalit women face, not only due to caste, but also due to gender. They have no reasonable means of escape. Workers like Maragadham eventually realize that they have been sold into slavery. Not only are they fed little and forced to work long hours; they are also sexually abused and harassed. During the colonial period, the rape of female slaves by their owners was common. 
Raasa is homesick and tries to flee. Unfortunately, the kangani＊s goons apprehend him and break the fibula (bone) of his left leg, which is the standard punishment for escape. His only means of reaching his family again requires him to work harder to earn more money. 
Due to poor sanitation on the estate, a virus spreads through the workers, eventually killing most of them. During a tea party, an English socialite requests that the plantation managers bring in a genuine doctor to cure the laborers. A Madras doctor and his English wife pay a visit to the plantation. But the doctor is also a convert to Christianity. Rather than helping the remaining sick employees, the doctor and his wife spend all of their time seeking to convert them.
Maragatham falls victim to the epidemic. After her death, Rassa takes her daughter as his own and prepares to leave. Rasaa is then informed that by ※adopting§ her daughter, he has taken on both of her parents＊ plantation debts and will have to work for nearly another 10 years to repay them. Rassa feels his fate crushing him. Then, from the top of a hill, he notices a new set of slaves being brought in. He recognizes his fianc谷e Angamma and their son among them. When he finds them, he cries as he tells them they are now in hell. The film concludes with the camera panning over the entire tea plantation and its employees, all of whom are staring at Rasaa, who is sobbing furiously.
The same situation prevails today in many respects. According to India＊s Ministry of Labor, 85 percent of Dalit women work in dangerous occupations: as tea estate workers, agricultural laborers, scavengers, sweepers, and human waste disposers. When Dalit women refuse to work for pitiful salaries or refuse to comply with the harsh demands made of them, they are subjected to open brutality, humiliation, beatings, rape, and imprisonment. There have also been a handful of instances where Dalit women＊s homes have been set ablaze (Agarwal and Levien 2020). 
The caste system, in effect, murders Dalits while they are still alive. The women in the movie who go to work on the tea plantation believe they will have a better life. In Tamil, a woman who travels in search of better work risks being labeled a paradesi, a disparaging term that means an impoverished women slave who cannot make a living in her own area. But Dalits have fled their homeland because of violent oppression. The rest of society knows little about their lives. Tea workers, for example, especially if they are women from Tamil Nadu, are kept hidden and unseen from the general public (Kamath and Ramanathan 2017). 
The abolition of women＊s slavery may have contributed to the emergence of feminism by enabling women slaves to do the same work as men. Female slaves were frequently made to labor alongside male slaves and were punished by identical methods, which may have educated females that they were as capable as men. Furthermore, gendered treatment has been demonstrated to work successfully for some women, allowing them to exert control over their masters through their sexuality and to be set free in specific situations.
Madha Yannai Kooitam: How Male-Identified 
Women Uphold Caste Violence
Madha Yannai Kootan (Sugumaran 2013) deals with many emotions: hatred, revenge, betrayal, fear. But pride and anger seem to get primary focus, and the film eventually ends in a frenzy of revenge, in which everyone in sight is massacred. The title actually translates to ※Herd of Mad Elephants.§ The characters in the film do exactly what a frantic herd of elephants does, that is, destroy everything in sight for no apparent reason. 
The opening scene of Madha Yaanai Koottam is one of the most well-structured in recent memory. Madha Yaanai Koottam begins with a funeral that introduces us to the powerful family of the deceased patriarch. We gradually learn about the simmering conflicts in the family. The story is set in a village in the area of Theni. 
The story centers on the family of Jayakkodi Thevar, a man who has two wives. The second wife belongs to the lower castes. Jayakkodi Thevar is a well-known landlord whose family has contributed to the village＊s development for years. His first wife Sevanamma and her older brother Veera, on the other hand, are thugs who are feared by the villagers. Veera married Sevanamma＊s daughter despite being 25 years older and already having four sons. 
Jayakkodi＊s second wife, and their two children, Ammu and Parthiban, desire to live with him. Parthiban is 12 years old. Since marriages are supposed to reinforce the caste system, not tear apart the hierarchical social order, very few marriages cross the boundaries of caste, clan, religion, region, and tradition. Inter-caste marriages are almost always denied. Thus, Jayakkodi＊s second marriage creates a wide range of problems within the extended family, particularly in relation to the lack of acceptance of Parthiban as he grows older. 
As a result of her husband＊s partiality for his second wife, Sevanamma despises her and her children. Veera thinks the death of one of his sisters to be the fault of his brother-in-law＊s second wife and her children, whom he despises. The only member of the first wife＊s family who embraces the second wife＊s family is Jayakkodi＊s drunken eldest son, Boologarasa, but he is frequently powerless in the face of his mother and maternal uncle. Because Jayakkodi＊s second wife is from a lesser caste, his relatives are afraid of his second family.
Ponram is a newly affluent individual from the same village and caste as Jayakkodi, and he aspires to be Jayakkodi＊s successor as the most well-known person in the village. After being outdone in temple donations, Ponram competes with Veera for a land tender from the Forest Department. When Jayakkodi arrives, Veera leaves the auction out of respect, but Jayakodi loses it to Ponram. Ponram＊s younger brother teases Jayakkodi and, later that night, Veera and his sons murder him. When Jayakkodi goes to pay his respects to Ponram＊s brother, Ponram and Parthiban fight. Parthiban and Jayakkodi are apprehended. Veera rushes to their aid and saves them with the help of a related lawyer. Ponram vows to avenge Jayakkodi＊s entire family. 
Jayakkodi＊s family is destroyed, but not at the hands of Ponram. Conflicts over caste within the family cause it to crumble from within. After Jayakkodi dies of a heart attack, there is little that can hold the family together. For example, Boologarasa invites his stepmother and half-siblings to the funeral, but his uncle Veera threatens to boycott the ceremony if they go. As a result, the second wife and her children are not allowed to participate in the funeral ceremony because the second wife is from a lower caste (R. L. Dhar 2013). This insult leads to a growing conflict. 
In one fight, days after the funeral, Parthiban accidentally kills one of Veera＊s sons and flees. Weeks later, the conflict culminates when Veera and his sons and other relatives attack Parthiban. Parthiban defeats his cousins, but Veera manages to stab and kill Parthiban. Veera and his sons are arrested for murder. Little is now left of the original family. An inter-caste marriage has unleashed a torrent of violence and cruelty. Being the target of hatred and abuse is a common experience, particularly for women who cross caste lines to pursue their ※forbidden love.§ Indeed, endogamous marriages and the lack of inter-marriage maintain the caste hierarchy, but they also reinforce the desirability of Dalit women, as intercaste and inter-religious marriages have begun to displace arranged marriages. Arranged marriages are celebrated and glorified, but they legitimize violence against people of different castes (Jauregui and McGuinness 2003).
The anti-discriminatory provisions of the Indian Constitution〞 Article 14 (equal protection of the laws to all, especially women), Article 15 (prohibition of discrimination on the basis of race, religion, caste, sex, or place of birth), and Article 21 (right to life, liberty, and property)〞guarantee equal rights to all citizens, including the right to marry according to one＊s own choice. In the case of Lata Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Others (2006), the Supreme Court of India came to the same conclusion. The Supreme Court overturned a lower-court decision that had nullified Lata Singh＊s inter-caste marriage and stated that the marriage was valid and legal. In fact, the Supreme Court stated that ※inter-caste marriages are in fact in the national interest as they will result in destroying the caste system.§ 
Nevertheless, inter-caste, inter-religious, and inter-linguistic love weddings are still frowned upon in many sectors of Indian society. Honor killings or forced family separation are common outcomes of such marriages (Raghavendra 2020). 
Honor killings remain common in India, with hundreds committed each year. Rural people often wish to uphold traditions, so they refuse to change even when the law changes. But the law could be used to disrupt the seeming legitimacy of honor killing in the eyes of many people in India. Therefore, prevention of honor killings will definitely reduce the number of victims. The purpose of this film is to focus on the need to protect inter-caste marriages between Dalit women and men from other communities (Singhal 2014).
Jai Bhim: Indirect Gender Discrimination 
People belonging to the scheduled tribes continue to be victims of discrimination, and women belonging to these tribes are doubly so. First, they are discriminated against on account of their caste status, and then along gender lines. Since the social order relegates the people of the scheduled tribes to the periphery, gender discrimination forces women belonging to these tribes to perpetual marginalization and subordination. Scheduled caste women face many oppressions as a result of caste discrimination passed down through the generations that violates their economic, political, social, and cultural rights. Because they are poor and illiterate, scheduled caste women are easy targets for sexual harassment. They make up the most disadvantaged part of society. Female feticide (selective abortion based on the fetus＊s gender), domestic violence, dowry killing, mental and physical torture, sexual trafficking, and public humiliation are all typical kinds of abuse perpetrated against scheduled caste women in India (Anand 2005). Women are subjected not only to caste violence perpetrated by the ruling castes, but also to state brutality. The greater Hindu culture, their own community＊s men, and even their own husbands oppress scheduled caste women. As a result, they have three disadvantages. Scheduled tribe women face difficulties that are distinct from those faced by other Indian women. They have been denied a wide range of human rights, including education, income, dignity, social standing, and religious freedom. 
Despite being among the country＊s oldest communities, these tribes lack proof of citizenship and are unable to purchase property. In Jai Bhim (Gnanavel 2021), when Mythra, an adult literacy teacher, attempts to obtain a voter ID for her students, who are members of a scheduled tribe, it seems she has violated a taboo against treating tribal members as persons. The local big shot, who belongs to a dominant caste, reveals his total contempt for the people he represents: ※Isn＊t it sufficient to simply ask the lower castes to vote for us? Should we also pay a visit to these people＊s homes?§ 
The main story in Jai Bhim is about police corruption and brutality. In the opening scene, as men are being released from prison, each is asked to state his caste. The police release the highcaste men and detain the members of scheduled castes and tribes to charge them randomly with crimes in order to close difficult cases. The audience learns that in Kammapuram, a village in the Virudhachalam district of Tamil Nadu, the people of the Irula tribe have been historically used as scapegoats. If the police cannot find an appropriate suspect or have a suspect from a high caste they want to protect, they simply charge one of the low-caste men whom they have detained. In this case, the police charge Rajakannu, a member of the Irula tribe, with theft. They do not need evidence of his actual involvement with the crime. They will simply torture a confession from him.
Rajakannu and his wife Senggeni are too poor to buy a brick house, but they are comfortable and cheerful. Their daughter Alli is in school and Senggeni is pregnant. Their peaceful lives are interrupted when a theft occurs at the house of a village leader where Rajakannu was hired to catch a snake. When the police are unable to locate him, they arrest the pregnant Senggeni and Rajakannu＊s brother. Senggeni is eventually released〞after being beaten and kicked many times. Rajakannu is eventually found and arrested. 
This type of situation is common. At one point, a group of tribal men testify before a police officer who is conducting an inquiry panel into the disappearance of three tribal men who were being interrogated by the police about a theft case. In the course of telling their stories, one man says the police once detained him for greeting the police. Another was detained simply for attempting to flee out of fear of the police. A common element of their stories is that detainees are tortured into confessing to crimes they know nothing about. 
The police torture Rajakannu to extract a confession, but he dies in custody. The police tell his anxious wife only that he went ※missing§ from custody. She imagines that he might be one of the three tribal men who escaped from the police. With the help of Chandru, an activist lawyer, Senggeni appeals to the Madras high court to find out what happened to her husband. Eventually, Chandru uncovers the truth about the death of Rajakannu at the hands of the police. 
Jai Bhim shows the hardship marginalized women and families go through when there is oppression, even if the oppression is primarily directed against their husbands. Even when women are not being tortured by the police, they experience the pain their husbands suffer. After their husbands are put in prison or killed, the wives must then try to hold their families together in a world that will treat them with contempt. This is especially true for women such as Senggeni, who is part of the Irula community. Although that community may help her in a time of distess, the community itself is under constant pressure and harassment by the outside world, so its members will always be more vulnerable than those of other communities.
Conclusion 
The obsession with controlling female sexuality persists across all caste groups, high and low. The laws of a liberal regime cannot change the power of these cultural traditions. There is irony in the fact that lower castes in the southern part of India reinforce the rules relating to female sexuality, since those rules lie at the heart of the caste system that is so harmful to them. 
Women in India fight back against partriarchal attitudes that oppress women directly in terms of men＊s power to control women＊s lives and indirectly in terms of the caste system that treats some women as doubly defiled. To achieve true gender equality will require the wholesale transformation of the institutions that have defined Indian society. Women have come to the forefront to challenge their assailants to explain in court what exactly was honorable about their actions. They increasingly demand that their tormentors face the consequences of violence. 
There is nothing comparable to going against the traditional belief systems that exist in India. But what baffles us is why so many innocent lives are lost in the name of traditions that cause such misery, as shown by the movies we have discussed. These three films touch on the untold and socially debilitating lives of women. Films are among the tools that can spark changes in society. They can foster the growth of the human mind, help us see the problems that we create by the illusions we live by, and help create the kind of world that would meet the standards of our highest ideals. This review summarizes some of the terrifying problems women face in reel and real life. By reflecting on what we have watched, we hope to expand the effectiveness of these films in contributing to a better society.
References
Agarwal, Samantha, and Michael Levien. (2020). ※Dalits and Dispossession: A 
Comparison.§ Journal of Contemporary Asia 50(5): 696每722.
Anand, Meena. (2005). Dalit Women: Fear and Discrimination. New Delhi: 
Isha Books.
Aslam, Mohammad. (1990). ※Scheduled Castes: Some Unresolved Problems.§ 
Journal of the Indian Law Institute 32(1): 110每113.
Bala. (2013). Paradesi [Vagabond]. Chennai, India: B Studios.
Dhar, Rajib L. (2013). ※Intercaste Marriage: A Study from the Indian Context.§ 
Marriage & Family Review 49(1): 1每25.
Gnanavel, T. J. (2021). Jai Bhim [Victory to Bhim]. Chennai, India: 2D 
Entertainment.
Jauregui, Beatrice, and Tara McGuinness. (2003). ※Inter-Community Marriage 
and Social Change in Contemporary India: Hybridist, Selectivity and 
Transnational Flows.§ Journal of South Asian Studies 26(1): 71每85.
Kamath, Rajalakshmi, and Smita Ramanathan. (2017). ※Women Tea Plantation 
Workers＊ Strike in Munnar, Kerala: Lessons for Trade Unions in 
Contemporary India.§ Critical Asian Studies 49(2): 244每256.
Lata Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Others (2006). Decision of the 
Supreme Court of India. https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1364215/
Moffatt, Michael. ([1979] 2015). An Untouchable Community in South India: 
Structure and Consensus. Princeton: Princeton University Press. https://
doi.org/10.1515/9781400870363.
Raghavendra, R. H. (2020). ※Literacy and Health Status of Scheduled Castes in 
India.§ Contemporary Voice of Dalit 12(1): 97每110.
Singhal, Vipin. (2014). Honour Killing in India: An Assessment. March 7. New 
Delhi: Indian Council for Social Science Research (ICSSR). https://doi.
org/10.2139/ssrn.2406031
Sugumaran, Vikram. (2013). Matha Yannai Kootam [Herd of Mad Elephants]. 
Chennai, India: GV Prakash Kumar Productions.
