“Smash Sexist Movies”: Gender, Culture and Ocker Cinema in 1970s Australia

In November 1973, director Tim Burstall was shooting a scene for his fourth feature film, Petersen, at the University of Melbourne. Burstall was the pre-eminent auteur of the ocker film genre, having directed Stork (1971) and Alvin Purple (1973). For Petersen, Burstall was again working with screenwriter David Williamson, who had already adapted his play The Coming of Stork for the screen. Petersen starred Jack Thompson as a working-class husband and father who wants to expand his horizons by studying arts at university and becomes embroiled in the tumultuous sexual politics of campus life. Thompson and his co-star, Belinda Giblin, were shooting a scene in which the campus Women’s Action Committee was (improbably) staging a live sex act outside the library to protest the jailing of a stripper who had had sex with three men at a buck’s night. Thompson and Giblin were naked on a mattress, under a tarpaulin, in front of a crowd of students serving as extras. The actors were to begin simulating sexual intercourse, and then the tarpaulin would be removed, revealing them to the crowd. Not long after filming began, the scene was disrupted by a group of women (and one man) carrying placards that read “Smash sexist movies” and “Burstall sexist shit” (Figure 1).

Figure 1. “Feminists protest”, 1974. Photograph by Rennie Ellis, courtesy of the Rennie Ellis Photographic Archive.
Burstall attempted to defuse the situation, telling the protesters that they should be happy they had disrupted production and asking them to move on so that he could film without further interruptions. One of the demonstrators demurred, telling Burstall that women’s rights were “my whole life, man”, but most of the protesters wandered off, and filming resumed. Robin Laurie was one of the women carrying placards. Then a lecturer in film at the Melbourne College of Education and a member of the avant-garde theatre collective the Australian Performing Group, Laurie said that she protested the filming because “my personal space is continually invaded by men whose image of women has been formed by the type of women portrayed in these kinds of films of Burstall’s that reinforce the so-called traditional sex roles”. She added that she distrusted Williamson because he had “a pretty distorted view of what women’s lib is all about”.1 Laurie later articulated her critique of Australia’s masculine film culture more fully in her 1976 experimental film, We Aim to Please, co-produced with Margot Nash. We Aim to Please was an indictment of the male cinematic gaze, and it argued that the logical outcome of this gaze was men’s violence towards women.2 We Aim to Please featured female nudity, but it was presented in funny and sensual ways, rather than for the titillation of an assumed male viewer. Laurie saw the campus clash with Burstall as inevitable: “Tim and his films [are] part of the social process and [I am] part of the social process and sooner or later we’re going to collide.” Reporting on the demonstration, Nation Review was less sanguine: the paper argued that it showed “no institution or cause is safe from the shock troops of women’s liberation”.3
I begin with this moment of disruption and contest between the pre-eminent filmmakers of the ocker era and feminist protesters keen to smash “sexist shit” because it draws attention to an often-overlooked aspect of Australian culture in the 1970s. The 1970s is regularly characterised as the decade of Australia’s “new nationalism”, expressed in a wave of cultural activity nurtured by government funding.4 The figure of the ocker was central to this new nationalism, particularly in film. According to film scholar Tom O’Regan, the ocker films were characterised by an “unabashed celebration of the ‘Australian’” couched in “an aggressively Australian or ‘strine’ accent. If ocker represented the elevation of slang and bad manners it did so in the context of an inventive, usually male, anti-language for bodily functions, sex, drinking, and women”.5 The ocker was important to the 1970s Australian film revival, and his influence continued to be felt long after the so-called “ocker cycle” faded from view.6
Only a small number of historians (Stuart Ward, Anne Pender and Tony Moore) have focused on popular culture as a source for understanding the new nationalism, and most work analysing the ocker has emerged instead in screen and cultural studies.7 Yet given the broad appeal of these films, they are important to understanding the ways that political, social and cultural change unfolded across the 1970s. The scholars who have examined these films have considered them through the lens of national identity and the cultural values of an emerging new middle class, but to date, only a few have subjected them to a gendered analysis. This oversight is especially remarkable when we consider that while the ocker films were being produced, the women’s liberation movement was mounting a radical challenge to Australian cultural, social and political norms.8 What new understandings of 1970s culture might result if we read the ocker and women’s liberation in the same frame? This article builds on the insights of Diane Kirkby and John Rickard to argue that if we view the ocker through a gendered lens, he can be interpreted as an expression of masculinist politics in a decade of contest over gender relations. Rickard speculated in 1996 that ockerism could be “seen as a rearguard assertion of male dominance in the social sphere … a determined ebullience in the face of new uncertainties”.9 Diane Kirkby likewise argued that the ocker’s celebration of excessive drinking helped to “reinscribe gender inequality” in 1970s Australia.10 The ocker responded to the challenge of women’s liberation by reasserting white masculinity as distinctively Australian. The ocker, and his continued dominance in the new nationalist popular culture of the 1970s, can therefore be read as a reaction to women’s liberation.
This reading of 1970s popular culture was inspired by the generative scholarship of Marilyn Lake, who has long argued for the centrality of gender to definitions of national culture and identity. In her 1986 article “The Politics of Respectability: Identifying the Masculinist Context”, Lake characterised the emergence of the bushman as a “national type” in the late 19th century—not as a product of nationalist sentiment, but as the result of a contest between men and women for “control of the national culture”.11 Supposedly national values such as mateship, she argued, were really expressions of masculine freedoms; women’s political activities, such as campaigns for temperance, were not mere “wowserism” but attempts to curb the excesses of a type of masculinity that posed real dangers to women and children. Lake advanced this argument through a reading of popular media and culture. She suggested that a cultural identity commonly read as nationalist—the 1890s bushman—was, in fact, an assertion of male identity in the face of a feminist challenge. What I suggest here is that we can read the popular culture of 1970s ockerism in a similar way.
Through close analysis of the public and critical reception of the ocker in Australian cinema, and a reading of the feminist challenge to ocker masculinity, I argue that the ocker was engaged in a gendered cultural contest in 1970s Australia. The article begins by offering a brief account of the history and historiography of the new nationalism, and the role that culture, particularly film, played in articulating it. I then examine the reception of the ocker genre in 1970s through the framework of a gendered cultural contest, with a particular focus on the films Alvin Purple (1973) and Petersen (1974). If we read the ocker as a response to women’s liberation, then we can also see the ways in which the movement’s critique of Australian masculinity rebuked the ocker. While critiquing masculinity was not the primary focus of the women’s liberation activism of the 1970s, a close reading of feminist periodicals, culture and protest reveals how the movement’s activists challenged ocker culture. It is clear, however, that their challenge was mostly unsuccessful. By the mid-1970s, the ocker genre had faded, superseded by the period film as the preferred mode for cinematic nationalism. This shift did not mean, however, that the ocker declined in prominence. Rather, ocker culture largely abandoned the satirical elements that characterised many of its earlier iterations and became mainstream, predominantly through the television comedy of Paul Hogan. By the mid-1980s, this (toned-down) ocker was again representing Australia to the world.
Gender, Culture and the “New Nationalism”
By the late 1960s, long-held ideas about Australia’s national identity and character were being questioned across the ideological spectrum. The Old Left radical nationalist tradition, best represented by Russel Ward’s 1958 text, The Australian Legend, had been attacked by Humphrey McQueen in A New Britannia, published in 1970. Ward had argued that the bushman, an egalitarian Australian “type”, had originated in the crucible of rural labour; New Left intellectual McQueen demolished the idea that egalitarian radical nationalism explained the Australian character, or the national past.12 Global political and economic shifts also forced Australians to reimagine national identity, as the British Empire ended and Britain joined the European Common Market in 1973.13 The cultural shift was much slower: Curran and Ward suggest that the decline of Britishness was a problem that “touched every aspect of Australian life where identifiably ‘British’ ideas, symbols, motifs, precepts and practices demanded remodelling”.14 They have also suggested that debate over identity “was rooted in perceptions—real or imagined—of how outsiders viewed Australia”.15 They examined various attempts to craft a new national identity in the 1960s and 1970s, including shifts in foreign policy and attempts to find a new national anthem. Donald Horne coined the term “new nationalism” in 1968 to describe this emerging national mood, and the phrase was quickly adopted more broadly.16 As Russell Marks has noted, the “new nationalism” encompassed a bipartisan approach to culture: while Horne created the term to describe Gorton’s prime ministership, Whitlam also adopted it to “describe his project of remaking Australia for the modern world”.17 Many felt that Australia was at last developing an “authentic” national identity free from cultural cringe, a distinctiveness that conferred what the novelist Robert Drewe called a “rare feeling of national self-respect”.18 Crucial to this was new government support for culture, signalled by the establishment of the Australian Council for the Arts in 1967. Recognition of Australian culture did more than provide material support: it seemed to affirm Australian culture’s very existence.
Curran and Ward argued that most of the attempts to craft new post-imperial symbols were unsuccessful. However, it was in the realm of popular culture (which Curran and Ward largely neglect in Unknown Nation) that the new nationalism was most potently expressed, and most popularly received. As part of the expansion of government funding for the arts, new funding and infrastructure was put in place to support the production of Australian films. The Holt and Gorton Liberal governments established the Australian Council for the Arts in 1967 and the Australian Film Development Corporation (AFDC) in 1969. These bodies demonstrated that governments endorsed film and television as a way to shape Australian identity: the Australian Council for the Arts asserted that without a film industry, Australia’s “efforts to interpret itself to the rest of the world” would be hampered.19 Launching the policy, Gorton argued that “government should devote [itself] not only to building great new factories and smelters … but also [to] the involvement in and development of the arts”.20 This funding expanded the national significance and box office reach of Australian cinema, producing films that both celebrated and critiqued Australia’s search for a post-imperial identity. The AFDC was encouraged to back popular rather than arthouse films, with the aim of growing a commercially viable film industry. Further film infrastructure would come under the Whitlam Government. The impact of this investment was quickly felt: while just 17 feature films were made in Australia in the 1960s, more than 150 were made in the 1970s.21
Tom O’Regan has classified Australian films of the 1970s into two categories: ocker films, which dominated the early 1970s, and so-called “quality” films, which were more prominent from the mid-1970s.22 The first film supported by the AFDC was The Adventures of Barry McKenzie (1972). Other key films in the “ocker cycle” were Stork (1971), Alvin Purple (1973), Petersen (1974), Barry McKenzie Holds his Own (1975), and Don’s Party (1976).23 While Australian expatriates Barry Humphries and Bruce Beresford were crucial to these early films (Beresford directed the Barry McKenzie films, which were based on Humphries’s comic strips, and also directed Don’s Party), Tim Burstall and David Williamson played a central role in the creation of the ocker cycle: Williamson wrote Stork, Petersen and Don’s Party, while Burstall directed Stork, Petersen and Alvin Purple. Williamson and Burstall (as well as actor Graham Blundell) were part of the Melbourne alternative theatre scene, shaped by the counterculture politics of the anti-war and women’s liberation movements.24 Historian Gabrielle Wolf argues that these writers and performers foregrounded the ocker because they believed he was an assertion of Australian independence, an expression of the counterculture ethos. But he was also an anti-hero: Australianness “was celebrated through self-deprecation”.25 This ambiguity—was the ocker a critique of, or a salute to, Australianness?—would also characterise the ocker on film.
The origins of ocker television were very different. Paul Hogan was not from the counterculture, and he set himself apart from the cinematic ocker, declaring that he was not a Barry McKenzie, who he said was “nothing but a send-up of an Australian”.26 Hogan was a married father of five, a Sydney labourer-turned-comedian who became an “ocker philosopher” on the Nine Network program A Current Affair. He hosted the long-running sketch comedy program The Paul Hogan Show from 1974 to 1984, where he had “developed and perfected the television ocker”.27 His advertisements for Winfield cigarettes cemented his fame, celebrating, in the words of Alan McKee, “a nation of ockers who smoked cigarettes”.28 Film and television critic Sandra Hall argued that compared to the cinematic ockers, Hogan was the “real thing — not somebody putting on a funny voice and pretending to be somebody he wasn’t for the edification of people who hoped they weren’t either”.29 Hogan’s ocker comedy was broader and less satirical, but he covered similar territory to the ocker films: Australian masculinity, drinking and sex. His comedy appealed to mainstream television audiences because it came from a place of identification. He explained: “I’m a typical Australian character … there’s no such thing as a typical Australian, but there are thousands walking around the streets who are just like me.”30
The ocker films were almost all bawdy comedies. They took advantage of the relaxation of censorship, which saw the introduction of the “R” certificate for films in 1971, and which gave them, as Jack Clancy put it, “inbuilt full frontal insurance”.31 Sex and nudity on screen in the early 1970s was regarded as progressive, both in terms of overcoming prudishness and permitting greater realism.32 Sex—the difficulties of obtaining it in Stork, Barry McKenzie and Don’s Party, or the exhausting hyper-availability of it in Alvin Purple and Petersen—was central to the ocker films, which offered abundant representation of what one reviewer dubbed “boobs and pubes”.33 Barry McKenzie, the first big hit of the ocker era, satirised Australia’s quest for a national identity with its cringe-worthy depiction of naïve, boorish Barry running amok in the “mother country” full of poseurs and eccentrics. While the film mocked the search for national identity, it resonated among both countercultural and mainstream audiences as an embodiment of the new nationalism. Manning Clark told Barry Humphries that when he saw Barry McKenzie in a crowded cinema, “the response … was so warm and spontaneous that it was quite clear once again that you had succeeded in catching a type Australians recognise”.34 Sandra Hall also found an audience eager to embrace Barry: “Bazza is … built for … a certain sort of audience identification … the moment they were all waiting for was the Chunder.”35 These kinds of reactions provoked critics to ask: were ocker films satirical or affectionate portrayals—or both? Writer Lisa Jacobsen suggests that representation of the ocker hovered between parody (on the part of creators) and reinforcement (from audiences): “The ocker played for laughs; the danger was that the audience laughed with him, not at him.”36
The enthusiastic audience response to Barry McKenzie inspired Burstall to create Alvin Purple because it showed “the potential for a sex comedy with … purely Australian ingredients”.37 Alvin Purple is indeed an Australian sex comedy, but the joke is on Alvin: despite his view that sex is “overrated”, he is bewilderingly irresistible to women of all ages, from screaming groups of schoolgirls to the wife of his school principal, to the psychologist he sees in a bid to avoid sex. The critical response to Alvin Purple was poor: Cinema Papers argued that “there is no question of Alvin Purple making any kind of contribution to the cultural life of this country at any level because it is a film that seeks only to exploit, never to enrich”.38 While it may not have been enriching, the film’s premise offered the filmmakers ample opportunities to showcase sex and nudity, which enhanced its appeal: Alvin Purple (1973) was the highest grossing film at the Australian box office between 1971 and 1977, and it inspired a sequel, Alvin Rides Again (1974), and a 1976 ABC television series.39 Burstall reflected on the film’s reception in 1974, noting that “some Australians are ashamed to see their society portrayed as it really is … two or three years ago Australians had an in-built resistance to local productions”. But, he added, “now they’re proud of them. There’s a zest and vitality in this country that is lacking overseas”.40 The success of Alvin inspired Burstall and others to make variations on the ocker theme.
As I noted earlier, scholars of the ocker films have contextualised them as part of the nationalist popular culture of the 1970s. Rickard charted the ocker’s lineage back to older nationalist archetypes, such as the larrikin and the bushman, while noting that by the 1990s, ocker had become a term of “cultural abuse”.41 Most of the cinematic ockers were proudly working class: for example, Petersen is an electrician, and Alvin Purple is a salesman. Yet many of the key creative personnel on the ocker films (including Williamson, Burstall and Blundell) were members of the new, countercultural middle class, who delighted in upending middle-class norms of “good taste” in their work.42 With a new Labor Government in power from late 1972, some commentators, such as cultural critic Max Harris, were anxious that the established social order had been inverted. Harris described ockerism as “ill-educated, dogmatic [and] incoherent”,43 inexorably linked to the rise of the Whitlam Government. Others interpreted the ocker as an assertion of egalitarianism: Stephen Alomes described ockerism as a “young, working class reaction against young, middle class trendyism, a beer-drinkers revolt against fashionable wine-quaffing sophisticates”.44 This might have been true of some of the audience for ocker films, but it was certainly not true of those “trendy” counterculture men who created them. Tony Moore argued that the ocker was a reaction against both the old and the new middle class and their claims to cultural superiority, a gleeful product of the “cultural iconoclasts of the ‘60s getting their hands on the mainstream media”.45 Stuart Ward read Barry McKenzie as a parody of Australia’s anxiety about its changing place in the world.46 Both Alan McKee and Robert Crawford pointed out the importance of television in popularising the ocker, which they suggest played a crucial role in introducing and legitimising him for a mass audience.47
The ocker was by no means universally beloved. Australians liked his egalitarianism and his larrikinism, but some were troubled by the idea that he might represent us to the world. Liberal senator George Hannan asked why federal funding had been offered to the “ghastly, vulgar” Adventures of Barry McKenzie.48 By the mid-1970s, filmmakers were encouraged instead to make “quality” films, and the ocker genre faded as many turned to period settings as a marker of quality.49 The ocker largely moved into television via John Singleton’s advertisements and the hugely successful Paul Hogan Show (1973–1984).50 But by the mid-1980s, the ocker was once again representing Australia on the global stage, as Hogan went from Australia’s loungerooms to Hollywood, using his ockerish everyman persona to sell Australia to international tourists.51 Hogan’s film Crocodile Dundee (1986) remains the highest-grossing Australian film of all time, more than 30 years after it was first released.52
Historians have not subjected the gender politics of the ocker films to extended analysis, though by the late 1970s, some critics were reflecting on the ways ocker cinema depicted gender relations. In 1979, Jack Clancy suggested that the early films of Australia’s cinema revival were shaped by two developments: the relaxation of censorship and shifts away from what he calls the “the serious consideration of women”. Confronted by women’s liberation, no longer able to easily slot women into stereotypical roles, Clancy suggested that filmmakers simply avoided depicting women altogether.53 He argued that this sidestepping produced a series of films that chart Australian male fantasies. Similarly, Greg Lewis, writing in Filmnews the same year, was baffled as to why, in the decade of women’s liberation, where “older standards of masculine behaviour have been revised fairly drastically … most of our films have barely raised the subject of what feminism or gay liberation has meant for the re-definition of contemporary masculine identity?”54 Critic Meghan Morris offered a pessimistic analysis of the depiction of heterosexuality in Australian cinema in 1980. She highlighted the fact that Australia’s nationalistic cinema revival was taking place when “traditional views of the family, love, sexual norms and male-female relationships have come under attack in all western, industrialised countries, and in which the function of the cinema, in reinforcing these views, has been criticised”.55 Greg McCarthy extended this point in 2001, suggesting that ocker films expressed anxiety over democratic change, which meant that “previously marginalised voices (feminist, Aboriginal, ethnic) were now being heard”.56 In her 2008 revisionist reading, Catharine Lumby argued that Alvin Purple reflects the “cultural, political and sexual anxieties and realities of its time”.57 Lumby championed the film’s “celebration” of female sexuality, even if it does so from a male perspective.58 Alexandra Heller-Nicholas, however, suggested that aspects of Lumby’s reading were nostalgic, seeking to defend the film against a critical contemporary gaze.59 Lumby’s reading also overlooks criticism of the film made by feminists when it was released. This article builds on these analyses to argue that the ocker was engaged in a gendered cultural contest in 1970s Australia. This claim is supported by two case studies: first, an examination of the ways that the women’s liberation movement viewed and critiqued ocker culture, including Alvin Purple, and second, by a reading of gender relations in Peterson.

Feminist Responses to Ocker Culture
In her 1975 classic, Damned Whores and God’s Police, Anne Summers attacked Australia’s culture of “misogynist ockerism”.60 Historian Miriam Dixson declared in her 1976 book, The Real Matilda, that “Australian women, women in the land of mateship, the Ocker, keg-culture, come pretty close to top rating as the ‘Doormats of the Western World’”.61 She argued that “the ocker’s way of being a male is so lacking in sensitivity, compassion, gentleness, inwardness and insight, as to render him not just an impoverished, but almost a caricatured, human being”.62 For Summers and Dixson, the ocker embodied Australian patriarchal masculinity. It is clear that some of the culture and activism of the women’s movement was responding—both directly and indirectly—to ocker culture. While the challenge of the women’s movement to Australian social and political norms and institutions is well known, the cultural dimensions of this struggle are less familiar.63 Feminist culture was a crucial aspect of women’s liberation, and women in the movement created films, books, theatre, music, art and television.64 Indeed, historian Susan Magarey has described feminist cultural production of the 1970s as a “cultural renaissance”;65 Margaret Henderson suggests that women’s liberation was a “force that used an expansive range of tactics to attempt a social revolution—a project in which cultural activism was intrinsic”.66
One of the earliest acts of feminist cultural activism that challenged dominant modes of Australian masculinity was Betty Can Jump (1972), a joint production of Carlton Women’s Liberation and the Australian Performing Group. The play, developed through consciousness-raising sessions, not only depicted the performer’s experiences of womanhood, but also satirised ocker masculinity: in one sequence, the women dressed as men and performed “drinking to excess, indulging in physical combat and looking down on women as mere sex objects and … housewives”.67 Film quickly became a key focus for feminist activists, who lobbied the government for financial support for feminist film.68 Feminists argued that film had the potential to challenge sexist representations of women: the International Women’s Year Film Fund—part of the broader support for feminist culture initiated during International Women’s Year in 1975—argued that Australian films have “reflected a male ethic, dominated by stock characters such as the strong silent bushman or the ‘ocker male’”.69 Feminist films such as Film for Discussion (1974) depicted boorish male behaviour as yet another exhausting aspect of women’s oppression.70 Though most of the key feminist films of the 1970s were experimental rather than popular films, they were nonetheless a powerful means of communicating liberationist ideas and perspectives.71
Women’s liberation promoted feminist culture as a way to challenge the male-dominated nature of Australian life and culture. When the movement formulated its first set of core demands in 1970, they not only addressed women’s public role (equal pay and job opportunities) and private lives (free childcare, access to contraception and abortion), but they also called for an end to sexist media images of women.72 In their first editorial, the editors of feminist journal Refractory Girl declared that they wanted “to force an awareness in all those who presume to write about society that the world is not composed entirely of men”.73 Feminists targeted, sometimes obliquely, both the new nationalism and popular culture in their work. They argued that popular culture limited and oppressed women, presenting them with “constant propaganda” that reinforced normative gender roles.74 This was a critique that some women clearly deployed in everyday life, as demonstrated by the Peterson protest, and David Williamson admitted in 1973 that he had been “abused by real liberated women—and there are a few of them around Carlton—for most of my female characters”.75 In 1974, a group of women protested outside the Greater Union Awards for Australian Films, arguing that Australian films made for profit would result in Hollywood stereotypes, “horrors such as Alvin Purple or worse”, and they protested the depiction of women as “sex objects, weak, silly, stupid, of limited abilities, destined for motherhood, or whatever stereotype is convenient”.76 Feminists argued that commercial cinema was incapable of representing women adequately: in 1975, media academic Patricia Edgar suggested that “it is ironic that at a time when many women have seized on a more productive and self-actualising life style than ever before, the film industry has turned away from reflecting it in any constructive or analytical way”.77
As Edgar’s comments demonstrate, feminists were becoming more vocal about what they saw as the narrow range of representations of women on screen. As the Greater Union Award protest showed, Alvin Purple became a target of feminist critique. Historian Susan Magarey described a women’s liberation march in Melbourne approaching a cinema that was screening Alvin Purple. The group’s response to the chant “What do we want?” changed from “We want equality!” to “Fuck Alvin Purple!”78 For the marchers, Alvin stood in for a larger patriarchal system. The feminist newspaper Vashti’s Voice review was little more than a scathing synopsis, concluding: “What bullshit! It’s a shame the developing film industry cannot think of another subject.”79 The central conceit of Alvin Purple—that he is an “an average sort of fellow” who is utterly irresistible to women—offered a male fantasy in an era of sexual liberation.80 Almost every (thinly drawn) female character in the film wants to have sex with Alvin: they are framed as objects of Alvin’s lust, or as disruptive in their desire. In the film’s opening scene on a tram, Alvin complains (via voiceover) while looking around at the alluringly dressed female passengers: “How can you keep your mind off [sex] when it’s being flung at you every moment of the day?” Indeed, the women around him seem to invite his objectifying gaze: one woman wears a t-shirt that reads “women should be obscene and not heard”, and Alvin fantasises about ripping another woman’s shirt open to expose her bare breasts.81 Like the television soap opera Number 96, the film conflated sexual liberation with women’s liberation, and female nudity with sexual freedom.82 The “permissive society”, it seems, had removed barriers to sex, but Alvin is exhausted by these women’s desires—he tells his psychiatrist that “the whole thing’s overrated”. Tina, Alvin’s girlfriend and the only woman who can resist him, renounces sex altogether: she joins a convent and tells Alvin that she loves him but will not marry him because his expansive sexual history makes him a bad prospect. Alvin ends his adventures working in the convent as a gardener, safe from women’s constant pursuit. Director Burstall admitted that the film was a fantasy, “and if you want to get heavy, a male chauvinist fantasy”.83 In her review, Sandra Hall described it as “cheerfully sexist … there is flesh everywhere but the motivations are made of cardboard and the women are universally stupid”.84 Robin Laurie, as I noted earlier, was even more succinct: Alvin Purple was “sexist shit”.
Ockerism under Siege: Petersen
Following the success of Alvin Purple, Tim Burstall commissioned David Williamson to write his first original screenplay for his next film. Burstall had been wounded by the hostile critical reception for Alvin Purple and perhaps in response, Petersen was less madcap than its predecessor, even as it remained focused on an ockerish protagonist.85 Described by the Age as a “colourful, believable slice-of-life character study”, Petersen depicted a former football-star-turned-tradesman (played by Jack Thompson), a husband and father who decides to study arts at university.86 The film’s creative team was keen to stress that the film marked a new “maturity” for the film industry: Thompson suggested it was evidence that “the industry is at last producing sociologically accurate portrayals of Australian situations”.87 Yet as Sandra Hall notes, Burstall had “learned the hard way about the type of insurance Australian films have needed so far in order to become commercial successes”.88 Petersen was a “raunchy, all-Australian blond”, a “magic stud” who not only cheats on his unsuspecting wife with his university lecturer’s wife but also has sex in public as part of a campus protest.89 Some critics regarded Petersen as cultural progress: the Age described it as “another step forward, a firm step beyond the Alvins and Storks and Bazzas”,90 though Derek Elley used a suitably hydraulic metaphor to imply that Australian cinema was “still experiencing the same sort of sexual release that most national cinema went through in the late 1960s”.91 Sexuality—and masculinity—was still the yardstick by which Australian cinematic “maturity” was being measured in 1974.
Petersen did not attract the same level of commentary from feminists as Alvin Purple did: by 1974, perhaps the movement was more focused on campaigns for childcare and women’s refuges. However, I argue that the film’s treatment of gender relations marks it as an important salvo in the gendered cultural contest of the 1970s. The film ultimately casts Petersen as a victim of changing gender and social norms. The trailer describes the film as a “study of a vanishing breed in today’s society, a man who plays by his own rules”.92 He is a “vanishing breed” because of his gender and social class: he is an electrician and former footballer whose physical prowess is largely superfluous at university. However, when he attends a fellow student’s birthday party, Petersen is the only man there who is capable of dispatching a group of gatecrashers through violence. Yet it is his relationships with women that ultimately defeat him in his quest to complete a university degree. There are three notable female characters: Petersen’s wife, Susie; feminist activist Moira; and Trish, the academic. Sandra Hall describes Petersen’s wife, Susie, as “so sweet and so dumb that there is nothing for the talented Jackie Weaver to play off”.93 At one point, Susie comments that one of her kids is bright, so “she must have got it from her father, because I’m stupid”. Bob Ellis described Susie as a “grimy little moo”.94 It is not a compassionate portrait of suburban motherhood, and it is in sharp contrast with the middle-class, politically active women of the Women’s Action Committee, which is clearly a women’s liberation group. These scenes allow Petersen to interact with feminist activists, although their protest—staging a live sex act on campus—bears little resemblance to feminist activism of the period and reads more as a fantasy of male ideas about feminism.
However, it is Petersen’s relationship with Trish that ultimately defeats his aspirations. On a weekend away, she tells Petersen that she would like to leave her husband and have Petersen’s baby, but he would not need to feel “obligated”. She tells him that she would live as a single mum and put the baby in the university creche so she could continue to work. Petersen replies: “What if it’s a boy? It’ll need its father.” He tells her that she is irresponsible and stupid to have children as a single mother. Here, Trish is depicted as possibly taking advantage of the new opportunities afforded by feminism: Petersen sees them not only as stupid but also as threatening to his masculinity. When Petersen fails an exam, and Trish tells him that she is leaving Australia to take a job at Oxford, he rapes her in her office in a moment of what Brian McFarlane calls “blind, furious vengeance”.95 The scene is an unnervingly vicious example of Meghan Morris’s observation that male–female relationships in ocker films are depicted as symbolic battlegrounds.96 The film ends with Petersen left behind by the feminist Trish, but unsatisfied with his “dumb” wife. In the final scene, he is still working as an electrician, quoting Shakespeare to impress a seductive housewife who is admiring his tan. He remains a suburban lothario, or, in the memorable words of reviewer Lucy Stone, a “souped-down Paul Hogan”.97
Conclusion
By the mid-1970s, the box office success of the ocker films made it difficult to justify government support, and their success generated ambivalence, even embarrassment: in 1975, the Federal Government refused to sponsor a screening of Barry McKenzie Holds his Own at Cannes “because of the ‘ocker’ image it portrays”.98 A new funding body, the Australian Film Commission, was tasked with funding quality films. Peter Weir’s 1975 film, Picnic at Hanging Rock, was a turning point in what was dubbed the “AFC genre”: critically lauded, aesthetically lush, and without a can of Fosters in sight. While the ocker films updated the bushman to a contemporary setting, AFC films such as Picnic at Hanging Rock replicated the visual culture of the 1890s. As Catriona Elder has pointed out, “much of the film product that was most successful in the 1970s told a story which was not very different to the one told almost 100 years earlier on canvas”.99 Even so, while many of the period films reiterated the link between masculinity and national identity, the period film also opened a cultural space for films that took women seriously. Two of the most important films of the women’s liberation era were period films: Caddie (1976) and My Brilliant Career (1979). These two films, depicting women torn between the demands of their private and working lives, clearly resonated with Australian women dealing with the same struggles in the 1970s.100
However, the success of the period film did not mean the end of the ocker: he flourished in other aspects of Australian culture, including in pub rock, in television programs such as The Paul Hogan Show, and in advertising.101 The early ocker films blurred the line between celebration and critique; by the late 1970s, the ocker was wholeheartedly embraced, particularly in advertising. Advertising executive John Singleton said that ocker advertising appealed to Australians because they wanted to “see themselves as they really are. The fact is, most Australians are Ocker, and those who raise up their hands bleating shock and horror are the minority”.102 By the mid-1980s, Paul Hogan had slipped the bounds of television sketch comedy and become a global celebrity, starring in both a series of commercials marketing Australia as an American tourist destination and the blockbuster film Crocodile Dundee. He was named Australian of the Year in 1985: the citation for his award notes that his television program “showcased his ocker brand of humour and endeared him to popular audiences”.103
On one reading, the ocker not only emerged triumphant in the gendered cultural contest of the 1970s, but also retained his dominance well beyond the period. However, in recent years, as Australian television producers have turned their gaze on the 1970s, the ocker is no longer the only figure in the frame. While the ocker has been part of this new wave of history television (for example, Paul Hogan was the subject of a 2017 miniseries about his life), some of the most resonant and successful productions have foregrounded touchstones of popular 1970s feminism.104 The television programs Paper Giants: The Birth of Cleo (2011) and Puberty Blues (2012) both reimagined the history of the 1970s as an era in which feminism flourished as a meaningful and transformative part of many women’s lives.105 By claiming what Margaret Henderson has called a “celebratory feminism” as one of the key national stories of the 1970s, these histories remind their audiences of the transformative impact of women’s liberation, which defined itself, at least in part, against ocker culture.106 Contemporary popular culture representations of the 1970s, then, offer Australians the possibility of remembering the period not only as a decade of ockerdom, but also as an era of feminist change.

Notes
1.	Rennie Ellis, “Libbers Castrate Campus,” Nation Review, 23–29 November 1973, 185.
2.	Mary Tomsic, “Feminist Films on Women’s Experiences of Violence,” in Gender Violence in Australia: Historical Perspectives, ed. Alana Piper and Ana Stevenson (Clayton: Monash University Publishing, 2019), 195–97.
3.	Ellis, “Libbers Castrate Campus,” 185.
4.	James Curran and Stuart Ward, The Unknown Nation: Australia after Empire (Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, 2010).
5.	Tom O’Regan, “Cinema Oz: The Ocker Films,” in The Australian Screen, ed. Albert Moran and Tom O’Regan (Ringwood: Penguin, 1989), 76.
6.	See O’Regan, “Cinema Oz”; Robert Crawford, “‘Anyhow … where d’yer get it, mate?’ Ockerdom in Adland Australia,” Journal of Australian Studies 31, no. 90 (2007): 1–15.
7.	Stuart Ward, “‘Culture up to our Arseholes’: Projecting Post-Imperial Australia,” Australian Journal of Politics and History 51, no. 1 (2005): 53–66; Anne Pender, “The Mythical Australian: Barry Humphries, Gough Whitlam and the ‘New Nationalism’,” Australian Journal of Politics and History 51, no. 1 (2005): 75; Tony Moore, The Barry McKenzie Films (Sydney: Currency Press, 2005); O’Regan, “Cinema Oz”; Catharine Lumby, Alvin Purple (Sydney: Currency Press, 2008); Lisa Jacobsen, “The Ocker in Australian Drama,” Meanjin 49, no. 1 (1990): 137–47.
8.	Susan Magarey, “Feminism as Cultural Renaissance,” Hecate 30, no. 1 (2004): 231–46; Margaret Henderson, “Wonders Taken for Signs: The Cultural Activism of the Australian Women’s Movement as Avant-Garde Reformation,” Lilith 17–18 (2012): 2–10.
9.	John Rickard, Australia: A Cultural History, 2nd ed. (London and New York: Longman, 1996), 261.
10.	Diane Kirkby, “‘Beer, Glorious Beer’: Gender Politics and Australian Popular Culture,” The Journal of Popular Culture 37, no. 2 (2003): 251–52.
11.	Marilyn Lake, “The Politics of Respectability: Identifying the Masculinist Context,” Historical Studies 22, no. 86 (1986): 116–17.
12.	Russel Ward, The Australian Legend (Melbourne, New York: Oxford University Press, 1958); Humphrey McQueen, A New Britannia (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1970).
13.	Curran and Ward, The Unknown Nation, 5.
14.	Curran and Ward, The Unknown Nation, 5.
15.	Curran and Ward, The Unknown Nation, 5.
16.	Donald Horne, “The New Nationalism,” Bulletin, 5 October 1968, 36.
17.	Russell Marks, “The Left and Australian Nationalism since the 1960s: A History of Rejection and Ambivalence,” Journal of Australian Studies 43, no. 2 (2019): 152.
18.	Robert Drewe, “The New Nationalism,” Australian, 9–12 April 1973, cited in Curran and Ward, Unknown Nation, 5.
19.	“Interim Report of the Film Committee, Australian Council for the Arts,” 1969, in An Australian Film Reader, ed. Albert Moran and Tom O’Regan (Sydney: Currency Press, 1985), 171.
20.	D. O’Brien, “Suddenly … an Australian Film Industry?,” Bulletin, 1 August 1970, 36.
21.	Catriona Elder, Being Australian: Narratives of National Identity (Crows Nest, NSW: Allen & Unwin, 2007), 194–95.
22.	Tom O’Regan, “Australian Film in the 1970s: The Ocker and the Quality Film,” Culture and Communication Reading Room (Murdoch University, 1995), http://wwwmcc.murdoch.edu.au/readingroom/film/1970s.html.
23.	Bruce Beresford and Barry Humphries, The Adventures of Barry McKenzie, directed by Bruce Beresford (Sydney and London: Longford Productions, 1972); David Williamson, Stork, directed by Tim Burstall (Melbourne: Tim Burstall and Associates, 1971), Alvin Purple, directed by Tim Burstall (Melbourne: Hexagon Productions, 1973); David Williamson, Petersen, directed by Tim Burstall (Melbourne: Hexagon Productions, 1974); Barry McKenzie Holds his Own, directed by Bruce Beresford (Sydney: Reg Grundy Productions, 1974), Don’s Party, directed by Bruce Beresford (Melbourne: Double Head Productions, 1976).
24.	Michelle Arrow, Friday on our Minds: Popular Culture in Australia since 1945 (Sydney: UNSW Press, 2009), 114.
25.	Gabrielle Wolf, Make It Australian: The Australian Performing Group, the Pram Factory and New Wave Theatre (Sydney: Currency Press, 2008), 40–41.
26.	Nan Musgrove, “No Flurry in Hogan’s World,” Australian Women’s Weekly, 18 September 1974, 7.
27.	Howard Dudding, “Hoges Gives Ockerdom the Boot,” TV Week, 7 May 1977, 8.
28.	Alan McKee, Australian Television: An Anthology of Great Moments (Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 2001), 121.
29.	Sandra Hall, Supertoy: Twenty Years of Australian Television (Sydney: Sun Books, 1976), 133.
30.	Marian McDonald, “TV Creates the Gold-Plated Ocker,” Bulletin, 24 February 1973, 54.
31.	Jack Clancy, “Australian Films and Fantasies,” Meanjin 38, no. 2 (1979): 195.
32.	Tom O’Regan, “Australian Film in the 1970s”.
33.	Dougal Macdonald, “Petersen Is for Audiences, Not Critics,” Canberra Times, 31 October 1974, 19.
34.	Manning Clark, letter to Barry Humphries, 16 October 1972, cited in Pender, “The Mythical Australian,” 75.
35.	Sandra Hall, “Bazza Brings It Up,” Bulletin, 21 October 1972, 45.
36.	Jacobsen, “The Ocker in Australian Drama,” 139.
37.	Rod Bishop and Peter Bielby, interview with Alan Finney, “75:25,” Cinema Papers, 2 April 1974, 125.
38.	John Tittensor, “Alvin Purple,” Cinema Papers, 2 April 1974, 179.
39.	Paul Byrnes, “Curator’s Notes,” Alvin Purple, https://aso.gov.au/titles/features/alvin-purple/notes/.
40.	“Fertile Year for this Film-Making Team,” Australian Women’s Weekly, 6 November 1974, 27.
41.	John Rickard, “Loveable Larrikins and Awful Ockers,” Journal of Australian Studies 25, no. 56 (1998): 82.
42.	Craig McGregor, “Ockers? They’re Always Someone Else,” Nation Review, 12–18 December 1975, 225.
43.	Max Harris, Ockers: Essays on the Bad Old New Australia (Adelaide: Maximus Books, 1974), viii.
44.	Stephen Alomes, A Nation at Last? The Changing Character of Australian Nationalism 1880–1988 (North Ryde: Angus & Robertson, 1988), 238.
45.	Moore, The Barry McKenzie Films, 3.
46.	Ward, “‘Culture up to our Arseholes’,” 65–66.
47.	Crawford, “‘Anyhow … ’,” 1–15; Alan McKee, Australian Television, 117–35.
48.	Quoted in Pender, “The Mythical Australian,” 74.
49.	Tom O’Regan, “Australian Film in the 1970s”.
50.	Tom O’Regan, “Ocker and the Tariff Board,” 83.
51.	Frank Bongiorno, The Eighties: The Decade That Transformed Australia (Collingwood: Black Inc., 2015), 235.
52.	“Top 100 Australian Feature Films of All Time,” Screen Australia, https://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/fact-finders/cinema/australian-films/top-films-at-the-box-office (accessed 21 January 2021).
53.	Clancy, “Australian Films and Fantasies,” 195.
54.	Glen Lewis, “Men in Recent Oz Films,” Filmnews, 1 January 1980, 9.
55.	Meghan Morris, “Personal Relationships and Sexuality,” in The New Australian Cinema, ed. Scott Murray (Melbourne: Nelson, 1980), 133.
56.	Greg McCarthy, “Caught between Empires: Ambivalence in Australian Films,” Critical Arts 15, no. 2 (2001): 154–74.
57.	Lumby, Alvin Purple, 4.
58.	Lumby, Alvin Purple, 30–31.
59.	Alexandra Heller-Nicholas, “Alvin Purple,” Metro Magazine 191 (2017): 112.
60.	Anne Summers, Damned Whores and God’s Police, 4th ed. (Sydney: NewSouth, 2016), 158.
61.	Miriam Dixson, The Real Matilda: Women and Identity in Australia 1788–1975 (Ringwood: Penguin, 1976), 11.
62.	Dixson, The Real Matilda, 30.
63.	See, for example, Marilyn Lake, Getting Equal: The History of Australian Feminism (St Leonards: Allen & Unwin, 1999); Marian Sawer and Gail Radford, Making Women Count: A History of the Women’s Electoral Lobby (Sydney: UNSW Press, 2008); and Michelle Arrow, The Seventies: The Personal, The Political and the Making of Modern Australia (Sydney: NewSouth, 2019). On the cultural aspects of women’s liberation, see Magarey, “Feminism as Cultural Renaissance” and Henderson, “Wonders Taken for Signs”.
64.	For a recent overview of historiography on the culture of the women’s liberation movements, see Michelle Arrow and Angela Woollacott, “Revolutionising the Everyday: The Transformative Impact of the Sexual and Feminist Movements on Australian Society and Culture,” in Everyday Revolutions: Remaking Gender, Sexuality and Culture in 1970s Australia (Acton: ANU Press, 2019), 1–22.
65.	Magarey, “Feminism as Cultural Renaissance,” 236.
66.	Henderson, “Wonders Taken for Signs,” 116.
67.	Cited in Wolf, Make It Australian, 102.
68.	Mary Tomsic, Beyond the Silver Screen: A History of Women, Filmmaking and Film Culture in Australia 1920–1990 (Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, 2017), 195–97.
69.	Sandra Alexander, “Women’s Film Fund Guidelines,” Filmnews, 1 March 1977, 5.
70.	Kath Kenny, “Girls on Film,” Saturday Paper, 4–10 August 2018, 28.
71.	On feminist filmmaking, see Annette Blonski, Barbara Creed, and Freda Freiberg, eds., Don’t Shoot Darling!: Women’s Independent Filmmaking in Australia (Richmond: Greenhouse Publications, 1987); and Tomsic, Beyond the Silver Screen.
72.	Ann Curthoys, “Doing It for Themselves: The Women’s Movement since 1970,” in Gender Relations in Australia: Domination and Negotiation, ed. Kay Saunders and Raymond Evans (Marrickville: Harcourt Australia, 1994), 434.
73.	“Editorial,” Refractory Girl 1 (Summer 1972–1973): 3.
74.	“Daytime Television: A Report by the Media Women’s Action Group in Conjunction with a Survey by the Women’s Electoral Lobby,” April 1973, Christine Fernon papers, National Library of Australia (NLA), MS 7689, Box 1, Folder 3, 10.
75.	Anne Yuille, “Will Success Spoil David Williamson?,” Cleo, August 1973, 25.
76.	“Women Filmmakers Criticise Awards,” Tribune, 4 June 1974, 12.
77.	Patricia Edgar, “Raped, Slapped and Ignored,” Cinema Papers, 5 March–April 1975, 41.
78.	Susan Magarey, Dangerous Ideas: Women’s Liberation – Women’s Studies – Around the World (Adelaide: University of Adelaide Press, 2014), 23–24.
79.	“Alvin Purple,” Vashti’s Voice 6 (March 1974): 12.
80.	Anne Woodham, “Tim Burstall: Taking Australian Films to the Top,” Cleo, January 1975, 25.
81.	Alexandra Heller-Nicholas, “Alvin Purple,” Metro Magazine 191 (2017): 112–14.
82.	McKee, Australian Television, 98–117.
83.	Woodham, “Tim Burstall,” 25.
84.	Sandra Hall, “A Silver Spoon for Local Film,” Bulletin, 22–29 December 1973, 45.
85.	Tim Burstall, “’What’s It Like on the Receiving End of Australian Film Criticism?,” Cinema Papers, November–December 1975, 214.
86.	Colin Bennett, “Petersen Takes Us on Another Step,” Age, 2 November 1974, 11.
87.	Ian Hodgkinson, “More Scope for Film Actor in Australia,” Canberra Times, 28 October 1974, 6.
88.	Sandra Hall, “Progress of an Aussie Rake,” Bulletin, 26 October 1974, 48.
89.	Lucy Stone, “Petersen,” Cinema Papers, 4 December 1974, 369; Jack Clancy, “And Yet Another View of Mr Thompson’s Buttocks,” Nation Review, 15–21 November 1974, 139.
90.	Bennett, “Petersen Takes Us on Another Step”.
91.	Cited in Macdonald, “Petersen Is for Audiences, Not Critics,” 19.
92.	See trailer, Petersen, DVD (2016).
93.	Hall, “Progress of an Aussie Rake,” 48.
94.	Bob Ellis, “Sparky’s Godless, Lonely Fuckfested Odyssey,” Nation Review, 8–14 November 1974, 109.
95.	Brian McFarlane, “Petersen,” Metro Magazine 172 (2012): 105.
96.	Morris, “Personal Relationships and Sexuality,” 137.
97.	Stone, “Petersen,” 369.
98.	“Bazza Not for Film Festival,” Canberra Times, 8 March 1975, 9.
99.	Elder, Being Australian, 198.
100.	Arrow, The Seventies, 121–23.
101.	Arrow, Friday on our Minds, 122–26.
102.	Kirsten Blanch, “The Great Ocker Ad Debate,” Cleo, September 1976, 132.
103.	“Paul Hogan Australian of the Year 1985,” Australian of the Year Awards, https://www.australianoftheyear.org.au/ (accessed 20 January 2021).
104.	Hoges: The Paul Hogan Story, directed by Kevin Carlin (Australia: Fremantle Media, 2017).
105.	Paper Giants: The Birth of Cleo, directed by Daina Reid (Sydney: Southern Star, 2011); Puberty Blues, created by John Edwards and Imogen Banks (Sydney: Southern Star, 2012).
106.	Margaret Henderson, “A Celebratory Feminist Aesthetics in Postfeminist Times: Screening Australian Women’s Liberation in Paper Giants – The Birth of Cleo,” Australian Feminist Studies 28, no. 77 (2013): 250–62; and Margaret Henderson “Revisioning Chicko Roles: Puberty Blues as Postfeminist Television Adaptation and the Feminization of the 1970s,” Continuum 30, no. 3 (2016): 326–35.