ON THE EDGE: LEISURE, CONSUMPTION
AND THE REPRESENTATION OF
ADVENTURE SPORTS
— EDITORS’ INTRODUCTION
Joan Ormrod and Belinda Wheaton
Lifestyle, eXtreme, whiz or adventure?
The chapters presented in this collection emerge from a symposium on
adventure sports held in the United Kingdom which aimed to open up a
debate on the significance of these sports through their representations
in the mass media. These sports, as Bourdieu (1984) notes, tend to have
originated in the contemporary forms from California, and much of the
research surrounding adventure sports is centred on America (Wheaton,
2004). Interestingly, the symposium attracted scholars mainly from Europe
and from diverse disciplinary backgrounds. Despite potentially disparate
approaches to the topic, the issues presented in the papers constituted
noteworthy crossovers in themes ranging from globalization, glocalization,
identities and consumerism which suggested the dissemination of the
materials to a wider audience.
Most edited collections on adventure sports begin by exploring the
range of descriptions of these sports and rationalising the choice of term
used. Midol (1993; 1995), for instance, notes the speed, transgression
and vertiginous aspect of the sports, describing them as ‘whiz’. Rinehart
and Sydnor (2003) opt for ‘extreme’ which, they propose, tends to be used
to appeal to notions of the radical, hip or cool in television and marketing.
However, as they also note, participants of these sporting activities “are in
it for the long haul. They see these activities as lifestyle choices, with style,
fashion and aesthetics being just as important markers of participation as,
for example, sponsorship and physical prowess” (Rinehart and Sydnor,
2003: p. 3). Clearly, therefore, a term needs to incorporate both hardcore,
transient and ‘weekend warrior’ participants. Wheaton’s preferred descriptor
is ‘lifestyle’ (2004), reasoning that this is the term most favoured by participants
who devote a great deal of time and money in their pursuit of these
vi Joan Ormrod and Belinda Wheaton
activities. However, Wheaton (2004) too notes how contemporary participants
adopt diverse attitudes to their sports performance and consumption. She
proposes that they choose their activities from a range of possible “leisure
options and experiences” (Wheaton, citing Rojek, 1995: p. 8). In this collection,
activities such as street racing (as in Simpson’s chapter) or indoor rock
climbing (as in Hardwell’s chapter), could not be described as ‘lifestyles’.
However, these vicarious activities express the participants’ interest in an
alternative means of seeking excitement or alternative leisure pursuits from
their everyday lifestyles. A possibility is suggested by L’Etang later in this
collection, who notes: “I have chosen to use the term ‘adventure sport’ rather
than that of ‘lifestyle sport’ since my understanding of this latter term is
of those activities, specifically identified by alternative formations, ideologies
and (often nomadic) lifestyles, such as surfing or climbing. In other words,
all sports have their specific cultures, and adventure sports seek to distinguish
themselves from more traditional sports cultures such as those
of football or rugby, not only in terms of their attitudes to competitiveness,
but also in terms of their approach to life in general or ‘lifestyle’” (L’Etang,
this volume: p. 44). L’Etang’s definition rests upon the attitude of the 
participants
to the sport and whether they consider the sport expresses a lifestyle
or otherwise. This definition is similar to Wheaton’s definition of ‘lifestyle’
sports in its reflection of “both the characteristics of these activities, and
their wider socio-cultural significance” (Wheaton, 2004: p. 4) it is, therefore,
apparent there is little difference between the two definitions. A reason for
choosing the term ‘adventure sports’ is that the collection is not only predicated
on participation in the sports, but also in the representations and
commodification of the sports within consumer culture. ‘Adventure’ is used
to describe these activities within the promotional and marketing process
but it also encompasses contemporary individuals’ search for adventure
and the ways identities are constructed in a leisure society through such
representations.
Adventure sports encompass board sports such as surfing, snowboarding,
wakeboarding but also rock climbing, BASE jumping and parkour.
These sports began as alternative activities that challenged traditional notions
of sport; they were predicated on a dwelling upon hedonism, individuality,
freedom from competition, aesthetics and embodiment. Many adventure
sports such as snowboarding (Donnelly, 2006), surfing (Wheaton, 2005)
and rock climbing (Varley, 2006) are practised by young, affluent individuals
(Fletcher, 2008) and this makes them attractive to promotional culture and
mass media representations. Indeed, contemporary culture is saturated with
images of adventure sports. Magazines with titles evoking excitement such
as such as Snowboard UK, Skateboarder, On The Edge, Carve and Wavelength
fill newsagents’ shelves. Films such as Riding Giants, Stone Monkey, and
Dogtown and Z-Boys present the danger but also the vertigo inspired by
the sport. National and global networks of adventure sports subcultures
On the Edge — Editors’ Introduction vii
are supported by the internet with enthusiasts and clubs setting up websites
and chatrooms providing information about venues, news and local activities.
Alongside these more mainstream (if they can be described as such)
adventure sports a new type of activity such as parkour (freestyle running),
BASE jumping, tombstoning (cliff jumping) have emerged predicated
upon similar values such as individuality, freedom and a maverick spirit.
Although these activities do not rely on expensive equipment or specialised
settings for their practice, they too are attractive to filmmakers, music video
directors and advertisers. Parkour, for instance, attracts much interest in
its spectacular stunts within the urban settings. Luc Besson’s science fiction
film, District 13 (2004) featuring David Belle and Cyril Raffaeli uses parkour
stunts as an integral plot device, Toyota features parkour in their 2006
advertising campaign and Grand Theft Auto 4, amongst a myriad of video
games, features parkour moves.
One key issue of representations of adventure sports is whether they
can express the emotions felt by participants during their play. Saville
(2008), for instance, notes how emotions in parkour can restrict or encourage
creativity in the play situation. Wheaton and Beal (2003) suggest that
authenticities in adventure sports are predicated on action rather than
reflection. Nevertheless participants and young people find representations
whether in mass or subcultural media of continuing fascination and there
is little doubt that mass media and subcultural representations do have
some influences on participants’ behaviours, styles and attitudes (Thornton,
1996; Wheaton and Beal, 2003).
A number of issues recur throughout the collection such as the nature
and expression of subcultural identities and values; the impact of promotional
culture, and its relationship with globalization, glocalization and local
identities and issues of risk raised by the encounters between adventure
sports and their representations in the media. The collection is divided into
two sections: representing adventure sports, and mediating identities. The
former discusses problems in the representations of adventure sports within
a consumer culture; the latter discusses the formation of identities arising
from the interplay between globalized, glocalized and localized media
representations and identities. However, these categories are not discreet
as issues overlap and recur throughout the collection. Indeed some of the
ideas put forth raise intriguing questions about the tenuous connection
between representations and the construction of identities within adventure
sports subcultures, but also in broader societal perceptions of these activities.
These issues are discussed below to frame the debates raised in the papers.
Representing adventure sports
The relationship between adventure sports and representations is ambiguous:
on one hand it is difficult to escape advertising images and films in
contemporary culture, but these images are often rejected by subcultural
viii Joan Ormrod and Belinda Wheaton
participants who favour their own media production. Subcultural media
texts in magazines and films have attracted much research and analysis
(Henderson: 1999, 2001; Stratton, 1996; Stranger, 1999). However, adventure
sports participants are also fascinated by mainstream media representations
in video games and extreme sports channels. Indeed, Wheaton notes the
diverse and fragmented ways participants engage with these sports: “watching
television, videos and live performances to playing the video games”
(Wheaton, 2004: p. 8). This contemporary grazing of mass media and
subcultural texts differs from earlier media representations up to the
early 1980s when communications were more tenuous. In my [Wheaton’s]
research on surfing in the 1960s and ‘70s, surfers did not have much choice
on surfing representations they could access in mass or subcultural media.
When they did access media representations in films and magazines they
used them to learn how to improve their surf technique. For instance, Bez
Newton who surfed in the 1960s and 1970s noted that:
I suppose it must have taken me five years to get to the standard
that most guys get to in six months now. There are reasons for
that: we never saw a surfing magazine, and until they came along
and we saw pictures of guys hanging ten … we didn’t know
that was something you could do on a surf board. (Newton, 1975:
p. 10)
However, they too were fascinated by any imagery of their sport. Clearly
then, although mass media representations may not possess the authenticity
of the subcultural production, nevertheless they are relevant to subcultural
participants as they articulate models of behaviour and values. This is noted
by Thornton (1996) in her study of clubcultures and Wheaton and Beal (2003)
in their analysis of skateboarding and windsurfing magazines.
The subcultural and mass media are crucial in the formation and 
‘authentication’
of subcultural hierarchies and identities (Thornton, 1996: p. 9).
In her study on club cultures, Thornton (1996) draws upon Bourdieu’s notion
of ‘cultural capital’ as the basis of her argument (Bourdieu, 1984). ‘Cultural
capital’ is not economic capital but is based upon one’s habitus or social
background which informs one’s cultural tastes. To demonstrate an expertise
or knowledge within a specific field or social milieu can result in achieving
more cultural capital and kudos. For instance within sports, capital can
be achieved by prizes or breaking records. Whilst not earning money, these
achievements can earn cultural capital that can, in turn, attract funding
and sponsorship. Thornton argues that subcultural capital, likewise, can
be achieved by knowledge or the accumulation of commodities within a 
subcultural
setting. In surfing, for instance, subcultural capital is achieved if
one is a technically competent surfer rather than someone who can afford
expensive surfing accessories, because, as in most adventure sports, authenticity
is demonstrated through ability to do it (Wheaton and Beal, 2003).
On the Edge — Editors’ Introduction ix
Arising from the notion proposed above that ‘buying’ into adventure
sports is regarded less favourably than commitment to and participation
in the subculture in time and effort (Wheaton and Beal, 2003), a key issue
in the representation of adventure sports is in their relationship with consumer
culture. Many of the representations prevalent in consumer culture
arise from forms of promotional culture, whether they promote a film, video
game or after-shave lotion. Moreover, media representations are encoded
with stories. In his ‘encoding/decoding’ model Hall (1999) for instance argues
that representations cannot transmit an exact record of events, they must
always be translated within institutional discourses: “the event must become
a ‘story’ before it can become a communicative event” (Hall, 1999: p. 52).
In the translation and editing of the event producers encode ideological 
messages
into the text. Adventure sports texts are often produced to appeal
to youthful or marginalised audiences in their representations of exotic but
also adrenalin-fuelled imagery. Campbell’s notion of fantasy (1987) and the
‘daydream’ evoked by the media text through the effects of capitalism is
useful to consider here. The notion of the romanticised and fantasy scenario
is related to individual lifestyles in high capitalism in which “The individual
is both actor and audience in his own drama … he constructed it, stars
in it, and constitutes the sum total of the audience” (Campbell, 1987: p.
78). The fantasy lifestyle promoted by the sojourn or ‘self departure’ 
(Rosengren,
1971) in a number of activities which might include adventure sports
is inspired by media representations. Rosengren argues that day-dreaming
is an integral part of the sojourn or tourist experience and fantasy scenarios
are constructed in promises of escape from the mundane everyday world
to idealised destinations and experiences in magazines. This can be seen
in Bruce Brown’s film, The Endless Summer (1964) in which two surfers
anticipate their ‘surfari’ around the world. Both read holiday brochures
recommending shark repellent and spelling out the dangers and pleasures
of travel. In this way the adventure sports participant enjoys a ‘self departure’
in mind in addition to a departure in body (Rosengren, 1971). That they
are travelling around the world is significant as their encounter with the
fantasy worlds of global travel enables them to construct ‘imagined lives’
(Wheaton, 2005: p. 146). A further issue of significance in this debate is
the relationship between mass media representations, the desire to experience
‘fantasy lifestyles’ and risk — a thread recurring in many of the chapters
in this collection.
Risk
The late 20th and the early 21st centuries seem to signal a major shift in
leisure participation in industrialised countries. Representations of adventure
sports in the mass media demonstrate what Beck (1992) describes as the
importance of experiencing danger and ‘living life to the full’ in a ‘risk society’.
Millions of people now apparently seek ‘danger’ and discomfort in unprex
Joan Ormrod and Belinda Wheaton
dictable or physically threatening settings in the performance of their leisure
activities. In his study of adventure sports participants’ motivations, Fletcher
(2008) notes that the risk posed by these sports appeals to middle-class
audiences because it produces a release and deferred gratification from the
demands of the workplace. In his study on skydiving, Lyng (1990) notes
that, contrary to societal ‘norms’ of behaviour, some individuals enjoy the
thrill of putting their bodies in danger: “…they all involve a clearly observable
threat to one’s physical and mental well-being or one’s sense of an ordered
existence” (Lyng 1990: p. 857). Lyng describes this type of action as 
‘edgework’
and suggests this negotiating of the borders of life and death is a way of
experiencing life in the raw. ‘Edgeworkers’, however, are not totally foolhardy
as they have a level of expertise that provides them with a degree of control
in a dangerous situation.
Risk and danger are also increasingly used in the promotion of adventure
sports (Palmer, 2004). The ‘cool’ associations of these sports attract youth
markets, but, more significantly, affluent youth markets, making adventure
sports attractive to promotional culture but these representations carry with
them problems in their transmission through promotional culture. The
representation
and consumption of adventure sports is big business, and the
association of ‘adventure’ with a product or service seems to lend a glamour
and desirability formerly only achieved using sexual imagery as marketing
gloss. While adventure sports often appeal through their promise of
excitement, there are also a growing number of more dangerous pursuits
that can lead to injury and deathfor those for whom the thrills of more
recognised adventure sports are not adequate. Activities such as train surfing,
sky surfing and ‘tombstoning’ (cliff jumping) can be viewed on YouTube.
There are growing numbers of internet websites and networks supporting
these activities but also a rise in reported accidents and fatalities when they
go wrong. In the latter case, these types of activity blur the distinctions
between sport and play through their appeal to elements of risk, danger
and adventure.
A further issue associated with the representations of adventure sports
is in their dissemination through globalized mediascapes and the relationships
between global and local communities.
Mediating identities: the global, the local, and the glocal
In his seminal work on globalization Robertson (1992) argues that globalization
is both a psychological perception of the world as a single entity and
a physical phenomenon arising from better transport and communications
systems. These phenomena have shrunk the world into what McLuhan
describes as a ‘global village’ (McLuhan and Powers, 1989). The development
of the global as a homogenous phenomenon runs hand in hand with the
growing development of national identities from the late eighteenth century.
Anderson (1991) notes how, from the sixteenth century, these national idenOn
the Edge — Editors’ Introduction xi
tities are produced from print media that construct notions of imagined
identities. These imagined identities form perceptions of what it is to be
English, French, etc. and respond to globalized phenomena at a local level.
Much debate on the relationship between the global and the local is
concerned with the unequal relationship between the West, usually America
or trans global corporations, and the disempowered local (Hannerz, 1991:
p. 87). Global culture, it is assumed, is promoted by global media corporations
which produce deterritorialised, culturally disconnected, and homogenous
texts. Relating this to sport, Wagner (1989) for instance, argues that 
Americanization
and blandness is implicated in the character of global sport.
However, this position has been contested as too simplistic by Robertson
(1990) who describes the interplay between the global and local as ‘glocal’.
Supporters of glocalization have argued for either an ‘adapt’ or ‘resist’
approach to glocalization; however, as Giulianotti and Robertson (2007) argue,
the local is an integral component of the global and there are more complex
reactions between the two states. Appadurai (1990), for instance, argues
that Anderson’s notion of ‘imagined’ communities underpins a more complex
relationship between global and local, facilitated by flows such as econoscapes
(the flows of money), technoscapes (the flow of technology) and mediascapes.
Using Scottish football fans who have migrated to North America as their
case study, Giulianotti and Robertson (2007) identify four glocalized responses
to the global and local interplay: relativization, accommodation, hybridization
and transformation.
As noted above, the collection is organised in two sections: representing
adventure sports and mediated identities. The purpose of the collection is
to open up a debate into the meanings and issues arising from representations
of adventure sports. The contributors’ backgrounds reflect the interdisciplinary
nature of adventure sports’ research with chapters coming from fields
such as law, sports sociology, marketing, film and media and sociology. The
contributors have employed a range of empirical methodologies such as 
qualitative
and quantitative surveys and interviews, auto-ethnographic writing
and analyses of legal and Parliamentary documents, marketing ephemera,
films and magazines. All the chapters, in some ways, reflect upon the 
relationship
between representations and adventure sports whether relating
them to globalization/ glocalization/ localization, risk or identities.
Representing adventure sports
Section 1, Representing adventure sports examines the relationship
between mass media and subcultural representations and adventure sports.
Robin Canniford’s chapter on the construction of surfing as primitive and
exotic demonstrates how the process of encoding works, as he describes
the results of an extended case study into the social construction of surfing
culture. He identifies representations of surfing within an historical and
xii Joan Ormrod and Belinda Wheaton
anthropological context from the primitive, sexualised and deviant tropes
that have been associated with the South Seas and surfing since the 19th
century. Whilst these features have led to disapproval and censure from
religious and governmental authorities, they have also been instrumental
in establishing the popularity of surfing as an iconic market phenomenon
in Westernised societies from the 1950s onwards. Relating these early images
to contemporary surfing discourses, Canniford’s provocative thesis is that
surfing has become a form of contained illegality: a deviant and risky cultural
space that treads the boundaries between delinquency and productivity.
This status has become an ordering principle around which the reconstruction
of surfing has taken place. Canniford notes that these representations
of transgression and deviance in surfing have thus become significant in
identity construction, marketing and subcultural theory.
Canniford’s chapter identifies issues of identity construction from outside
the subculture. The following chapter examines socio-historic issues
affecting surfing outside the subculture and how these issues could be identified
within the narratives of ‘pure’ surfing films’ (films produced by surfers
to appeal to surfer audiences). In ‘Representing ‘authentic’ surfer identities
in “pure” surf films’, Joan Ormrod examines wider cultural issues such
as masculinity encoded in the behaviour and performance of the surfing
hero in ‘pure’ surfing films. However, the surfing hero does not enact a 
homogenous
and essentialist notion of masculinity; rather he expresses a plurality
of masculine identities (Kennedy 2000; Wheaton 2000) or as Mangan (1996)
describes it, ‘ubiquitous masculinity’. Dawson (1994) goes one step further,
suggesting that the adventure hero, a creation of ‘cultural activity’, is 
constructed
in different forms depending upon the historic-cultural moment.
Ormrod’s chapter illuminates the masculinities revealed in ‘pure’ surfing
films as fluid, changing from the carefree, laddish behaviour of the early
1960s Malibu surfers to the sensitive, hedonist soul surfers of the early
1970s and the rowdy, wave-ripping pro surfers of the late 1970s Free Ride
generation. However, even with these seemingly diverse performances of
surfer identities, values such as courage and risk were also promoted in
the films’ narratives. The chapter identifies how diegetic (narrative devices
within the film) and institutional devices produce surfing audiences’
identification. In the film narratives, ideal audiences (young, male, white,
surfers) were encouraged to model their behaviours and masculine 
performances
on that of the stars in the films. However, these behaviours were also
reinforced through institutional strategies such as the distribution and
screening of the films in small venues.
The following chapters explore the sometimes uneasy relationship
between public relations and adventure sports. In her chapter, ‘Public Relations
and the promotion of adventure sport’, Jacquie L’Etang argues that
insufficient attention is given to source-media relations both in sports studies
and media studies. Based on interviews with practitioners, editors and the
On the Edge — Editors’ Introduction xiii
adventure sports community, she utilises concepts from public relations
and cultural theory to understand critical dynamics behind the scenes of
representation. She includes a discussion of the promotion and representation
of risk through newspaper articles on specific sports: mountain biking,
canoeing, adventure racing, kite-surfing and skating (skateboard-ing), largely,
but not exclusively, within Scotland and in the context of sports tourism.
She also notes the responses from subcultural media to alarmist articles
concluding that some adventure sports need to generate income to survive.
It is in the generation of income that the tenuous line between representations
glamourising risk must be balanced with accusations of ‘selling out’.
Where issues of risk and ‘selling out’ may be the concerns of subcultural
participants (Wheaton, 2005), Brian Simpson’s chapter examines the 
discourses
constructing deviancy in legal and statutory documents. Simpson
deconstructs Parliamentary and legal discourses surrounding ‘hoons’ (a term
applied in Australia to a person who drives fast, although it has been applied
in particular to those who participate in street racing) to expose the paradoxes
of encoding within legal and Parliamentary institutions. He describes how a
number of Australian State Parliaments have passed ‘anti-hoon’ laws which
provide for the confiscation of hoons’ ve-hicles. Usually such laws are debated
in terms of the extent to which they effectively or fairly deal with the ‘social
problem’ they aim to address. Simpson exposes the strategies used by 
lawmakers
who, he argues, define street racing as the social problem. Reading
the law and parliamentary debates on these laws as a narrative poses questions
as to whether the problem of street racing has more to do with the views
of powerful groups as to what is ‘appropriate’ sport (with presumably 
acceptable
levels of risk) and what is ‘inap-propriate behaviour’ not worthy of the
label ‘sport’. Reading legal materials in this manner reveals other possible
explanations for the legal construction and representation of this activity.
Mediated identities
Section 2, Mediated identities explores globalized and marginalized
identities in adventure sports. Global representations, as noted above, inspire
dreams of fantasy lifestyles, dreams that can sometimes obfuscate issues
of risk. So what happens in encounters between two cultures with entirely
different attitudes towards risk? This is the basis for Barbara Humberstone’s
chapter which examines risk and danger in adventure holiday promotion.
Humberstone identifies the mismatch between encoded messages of exoticism
and paradise in the homogenous packaging of adventure education. Adventure
education is packaged in a homogenous manner to efface the risks
and dangers of the adventure experience, ‘consumers are encouraged to
‘buy into’ the product without fully understanding the skills and experience
needed to participate with, on occasions, dire consequences’. Humberstone’s
chapter locates these debates within a glocalized framework, comparing
xiv Joan Ormrod and Belinda Wheaton
western attitudes towards danger with those of the indigenes in Mauritius.
In her use of ‘glocalization’ Humberstone relates Robertson’s notion of the
glocal, the ways in which local texts react or adapt to global texts. For
instance, Ritzer (2003, 2004) argues that global corporations such as
MacDonald’s adapt to local tastes in their production of commodities. So,
as Humberstone notes, the packaging of the local through the global adventure
experience is a type of ‘adventure in a bun’.
An example of glocalized sporting identities transformation is made in
the chapter by Ugo Corte and Bob Edwards which examines the development
of the small city of Greenville, North Carolina as one of three or four 
internationally
significant hubs of BMX (bicycle motocross and freestyle) biking.
Surprisingly Greenville’s significance for BMX eclipses much larger 
metropolitan
areas in the Unit-ed States. Known by the BMX community as “ProTown USA”, a large contingent of BMX professionals from the U.S., Australia
and Europe have relocated to live and ride in Greenville. These athletes divide
their time between Greenville, NC and touring the country to be filmed for
videos, performing at demonstration shows during the weekends, and
participating in a national contest circuit that consists of four major 
competitions,
most notably ESPN’s X-Games and the Gravity Games. The most
famous BMX pros appear in popular media (e.g. hosting MTV shows), promote
video games that feature them, and juggle a busy schedule of commercial
appearances for corporate sponsors. Drawing on Snow’s concept of “theoretical
extension” (Snow, 2004) Corte and Edwards explain how, and why,
a group of people from different parts of the world has come together in a
peripheral place and constructed an alternative lifestyle around an extreme
sport that has become the centre of their lives. The research also outlines
the features of the collective/transformed identity and closed community
that its members have created. A mix of factors congruent with a recent
formulation of resource mobilization theory (Edwards and McCarthy, 2004),
and collective identity (Taylor and Wittier, 1992), help to account for the
relocation process and community construction that has been taking place
in Greenville. Ultimately the research highlights the conditions and properties
that create a special lifestyle community, and therefore aims at generalizing
the findings to other subcultural communities centred on different
professionalized sports and arts, and other forms of creative expression.
The following chapters scrutinize marginalised identities in adventure
sports: Wheaton’s chapter examines racialized ‘others’ in South African skate
parks; Hardwell identifies the diverse values constructing indoor rock climbing.
Taking her cue from Maguire (1999), Belinda Wheaton (2005), notes that
in a globalized world although participants may enact, ‘nomadic 
cosmopolitanisms’,
or an open disposition to other cultures, the main participants
in lifestyle sports tend to be Western white males. Indigenes are co-opted to
work in tourist services such as cafes and hotels. Wheaton begins by reviewing
current work around the cultural politics of lifestyle sport, focusing on the
On the Edge — Editors’ Introduction xv
absence of ‘race’ and ethnicity. She suggests that although adventure sports
have the potential to attract young people who are excluded from or
disenfranchised by traditional institutional sport, in most activities the majority
of participants are privileged white males. While it has been illustrated that
extreme sport in North America has become an important contemporary site
of whiteness, research exploring how participants in adventure sports activities
experience such racial identities or how ethnicity is related to exclusion
processes in these subcultures is limited. To explore this question Wheaton
uses a case study of a skateboarding project based in and around Durban,
South Africa, with an ethos of ‘uniting people through skateboarding’. The
paper therefore outlines an agenda for examining the construction of identity
and difference in a global/local nexus in adventure sport cultures.
Wheaton challenges the issue of disempowerment and disaffection in
such marginalised youth as it misunderstands the complexity of glocalized
phenomena. Friedman (1991), for instance, uses Gongalese youths’ 
consumption
of La Sape fashions to note that rather than resist hegemonic
westernised culture, these youths appropriate and use these fashions as
hierarchical markers of style in the Congo. Similarly, Wheaton shows how
South African youths appropriated gangsta culture to enact transformed
glocalized identities (Giulianotti and Robertson, 2007). In their use of spaces
and their skateboarding activities, Wheaton points out, “Lifestyle sport does
have the poten-tial to include people of different backgrounds, including the
least privileged like street kids. Aspects such as the lack of institutionalisation
and adult control (more so in Europe than North America), the individualised
and non-league based nature make it particularly open to the possibility of
re-negotiated and self -generated identities and meanings” (Wheaton, this
volume: p. 154).
A second area of negligence in adventure sports research is, according
to Donnelly (2006), in its concerns over core members of a subculture and
in their part in the construction of its values. Donnelly (2006) argues that
research tends to ignore peripheral participants who take part in sports
erratically or who are not core members of the subcultural elite: “the periphery
has been there for as long as the subcultures, and their relationships to
the extreme sports world are determined, defined, or developed in almost
exclusively commercial ways; that is the sports and activities are purchased
or, more accurately, consumed” (Donnelly, 2006: p. 219). Wheaton’s chapter,
in analysing the behaviours of local disadvantaged black youth in Durban,
South Africa responding to western culture, identifies a number of responses
in Giulianotti and Robertson’s model, these are discussed below as they
articulate some of the silenced voices at the peripheries of adventure sports
cultures. These silent voices are also given voice in Hardwell’s research into
indoor climbing cultures, and this chapter has implications for research
into adventure sports subcultures as it traces the hierarchies between
dominant and marginalised rock climbing forms.
xvi Joan Ormrod and Belinda Wheaton
Marginalised and silenced voices of a perceived ‘inauthentic’ form of
rock climbing, indoor rock climbing, are examined in Ashley Hardwell’s
chapter. Hardwell contends that UK rock climbing is a differentiated activity
with easily rec-ognised sub-groups. Traditional climbing, sport climbing,
bouldering and indoor climbing represent just four of these. Participants
are able to choose the type of rock climbing they prefer. Heelas (1992: p.
2) sees this opening up of opportunity and choice as part of the way in which
“capitalistic producers seek to increase sales” resulting in commodification
and commercialisation of anything that can be sold. Hardwell’s chapter
focuses specifically on research conducted with indoor-only climbers. It
demonstrates the hierarchical construction of rock climbing through its
various types, noting how subcultural values are expressed through the
more traditional types of rock climbing and those with a longer heritage.
Yet the appeal to indoor climbers differs from that of the more traditional
outdoor climbers and this study raises the question of why a particular range
of values is preferenced over others within subcultures.
Although the chapters are from diverse disciplinary backgrounds, they
express many of the concerns of adventure sports in their interest in the
construction of identities and perceptions of adventure sports through 
representations.
In their underpinning research methods they have reached
conclusions that develop or challenge issues surrounding globalization, risk
and marginalised identities, mostly through the lens of media representations.
Problems relating to adventure sports fetishization of danger and risk and
their commodification in the mass media and globalized ‘fantasy lifestyles’
are identified in L’Etang and Humberstone’s chapters. The complexities of
representations in mass and subcultural media and institutional documents
in Canniford and Simpson’s chapters demonstrate the discursive constructions
of transgression and exoticization in the “webs of significance” (Geertz,
1973: p. 5) that underpin perceptions of adventure sports outside the 
subcultures.
The importance of media representations in the construction of
participants’ collective values and hierarchies is identified in Ormrod, Corte
and Edwards’s chapters. Wheaton and Hardwell’s chapters demonstrate
both the diffuse nature of subcultures and the mutability of their values
and hierarchies. While there remains much to do — for instance, in explorations
of marginalised subcultural identities and in European globalized,
glocalized and localized perspectives — this collection constitutes the basis
for extending adventure sports research with a view to opening up new
debates within this expanding discourse