Chapter 1: Introduction
The turn of the millennium has heralded an explosion in popularity of 
“alternative lifestyle sports” often also referred to as adventure or 
extreme sports. These have presented both new avenues and potential 
challenges to the traditional ways of conceptualizing and practicing sports
(Beal, 1995; Rinehart & Snydor, 2003; Wheaton, 2004). This research 
project is grounded in the lived culture of climbing, kayaking and other 
adventure sports. It aims to examine the meanings, experiences and 
pleasures of the practice for those who take part in these activities.
In this thesis I will be looking at adventure sports at a subcultural level. 
The crucial factor is that subculture is understood as being in opposition 
to the predominant normative system, but still tied to the norms and 
expectations of the larger culture. Hence I will pose the question whether 
adventure sports, although developed in a different social context to 
traditional sports, merely replicate social structures, identities and social 
order existent in mainstream sports.
For the purpose of this research I am adopting a combination of analytical 
approaches. In addition to appreciating sport as a factor or activity which 
can be used to explain other social phenomena or developments, I am 
following the perspective that sports historian Hill among others has 
adopted. He supports the view that ‘sport and leisure are processes which 
themselves have a determining influence over people’s lives’ (Hill, 2002: 
2). Further he states that:
The practices and texts of sport and leisure exist not simply as 
something shaped by other sources, but as cultural agencies with a 
7
power to work on their participants and consumers ideologically 
(ibid.).
This lends itself particularly well to understanding adventure sports 
where many participants are living the total ‘lifestyle’ of a climber,
kayaker or other outdoor activist – as typified by the ubiquitous 
advertising campaign for DMM climbing equipment that dominated the 
1990s climbing scene – “Climb now, work later”.
In order to explore adventure sports, I will first aim to define the nature of 
adventure sports and their appeal to their participants, and discuss how 
this is changing as these activities develop. I will then investigate the
impact globalisation and commercialisation has had on the development 
of this subculture. 
During the last 25 years, adventure sports have started to raise the interest 
of scholars and a substantive body of research has emerged (see e.g. 
Atkinson & Young, 2008; Beal, 1999; Beal & Wilson, 2004; Donnelly, 
2003 & 2004; Gilchrist, 2007a / 2007b / 2008 / 2009 / 2012; Jarvie, 2006; 
Kay & Laberge, 2002a & 2002b; Laurendeau, 2004; Lewis, 2002; 
McKay & Dallaire, 2013; Midol, 1995; Rinehart & Snydor, 2003; 
Robinson, 2002 & 2008; Thorpe, 2005; Thorpe & Wheaton, 2005; 
Varley, 2006; Wheaton, 2002a / 2002b / 2007 / 2010; Wheaton & Beal, 
2002; West & Allin, 2010; Young & Dallaire, 2008).
Many different labels have been attached such as ‘alternative, new, 
extreme, adventure, panic, action, whiz and lifestyle sport’ (Wheaton, 
2010: 1057) to incorporate a wide range of sports which entail new and 
innovative forms such as parkour, adventure racing and kite-surfing, but 
8
also include sports which have had longer traditions such as climbing and 
kayaking. 
Many authors (e.g. Bottenburg & Salome, 2013; West & Allin, 2010; 
Wheaton, 2004) are now favouring the term ‘lifestyle sport’ as a 
particular lifestyle is seen to be central to the process of meaning and 
experience of adventure sports. As Wheaton describes when discussing 
her research on windsurfing: ‘Participants sought out a lifestyle that was 
distinctive, often alternative, and that gave them a particular and 
exclusives social identity’ (2004: 4). The term lifestyle sports 
demonstrates ‘an expression adopted by members of the cultures 
themselves, and one that encapsulates these cultures and their identities 
[…] and their wider socio-cultural significance’ (ibid.).
Rinehart (1998) and Kay & Laberge (2002a: 17) have defined lifestyle 
sports as those that either ‘ideologically or practically provide alternatives 
to mainstream sports and their values’. They also highlight that increased 
commercialisation is changing theses type of sports. They state:
Although the ‘anti-mainstream’ image of extreme sports is still 
apparent, its interdependent relationship with the media and 
corporate agents has de-emphasised – or even reversed – the 
oppositional ideology that marked its earlier motivation. (ibid.)
Kay & Laberge (2002b) have also clearly linked the rise of those types 
of ‘fringe’ sports to aspects of commercialisation. They claim that 
‘“adventure” has now become a distinguishing brand and marketing 
strategy, co-opted and commodified to suggest and/or validate producers’ 
and products’ active membership’ and although they refer mainly to one 
specific type of sport – adventure racing – they clearly identify the 
9
difference between mainstream and thoee new types of sports. The 
difference lies in the notion of being a ‘lifestyle’ sport, an integral and 
invested part of participants’ lives. This conforms with Coupland’s 
understanding of the action sport game as a ‘postmodern, selfconsciously constructed, result driven form of sport endeavour’ (1998: 
99). Other scholars have gone even further and stated that new 
generations are increasingly turning to and creating a new sport culture 
that is based on deinstitutionalisation, delocalisation, ecologisation, 
hybridisation and adventurisation (Pociello, 1999: 167-170). What this 
encapsulates is that participants of such a sport might be defined by great 
commitment to the lifestyle, but often also buy into an individualistic 
ideology which rejects institutionalisation (Wheaton, 2004). Many such 
sports take place in a globalised field and offer a wealth of opportunities 
for developing into more specialised subcategories.
Whilst understanding the sports at the centre of my thesis as lifestyle 
sports, I have chosen to use the title adventure sports for this thesis as 
‘adventure’ is at the core of the sporting activities analysed in this thesis. 
I am defining adventure as an endeavour with an unexpected outcome 
incorporating a degree of risk and the idea of a challenge. The British 
Mountaineering Council’s participation statement supports the notion of 
risk as a substantial element of the activity.
The BMC recognises that climbing and mountaineering are activities 
with a danger of personal injury or death. Participants in these 
activities should be aware of and accept these risks and be responsible 
for their own actions and involvement. (BMC members’ handbook, 
2004)
10
Whilst the focus of my thesis is on mountaineering and climbing, I have 
also incorporated other related adventure sports such as hill running and 
kayaking as many participants of those sports tend to combine these 
activities due to the seasonality of adventure sports. Particularly in the 
UK, the seasons and the weather greatly determine what activities can be 
carried out. So whilst during dry and sunny weather participants might go 
rock-climbing, the autumn lends itself to hill running, mountain biking 
and kayaking, whilst in winter ice climbing might be the order of the day.
Adventure sports are undoubtedly becoming more mainstream as the 
proliferation of commercial providers are changing the experience. In 
mountaineering for example, traditionally there used to be the notion of 
an ‘apprenticeship’ in which skills would be slowly developed through 
immersion and learning from experienced partners. Now, many beginners 
are looking for the ‘quick fix’ by paying for courses or relying on guides 
without the need for learning the skills themselves. Former niche extreme 
sports manufacturers such as The North Face and Berghaus have 
piggybacked on the popularity of these activities to develop global brands 
which can be purchased in flagship high street stores. 
It is now generally accepted that commercialism has fundamentally 
changed popular sports such as football, athletics, rugby and cricket over 
the past century (Boyle & Haynes, 2009; Boyle & O’Connor, 1993; 
Coakley, 1998; Horne, Tomlinson, Whannel & Woodward, 2013;
Kinkema & Harris, 1998; Rowe, 2004; Whannel 1992). In this research, I 
will analyse whether a similar pattern can be observed in adventure
sports.
11
As mentioned above, the focus throughout this research has 
predominantly been on mountaineering and climbing – traditionally 
considered as niche activities which have not been well understood by 
either the general population or the mass media. I will present evidence of 
the surge of interest in the sport over the last two decades and explore the 
impact the development of adventure sports has had in the wider UK 
economic context. Further, this research aims to examine the role of the 
media in its rise in participation, its lived experience and its role in 
shaping the sports.
Finally, I will investigate the position and role of women in adventure 
sports, particularly in climbing. My focus in this thesis lies particularly in 
the female gendered experience as extensive research has already focused 
on masculinities and rock climbing (see e.g. Robinson 2002, Robinson 
2008). I will review the portrayal and treatment of women in the 
traditional male dominated world of climbing through the different eras 
and challenge to what extent things have changed as we move further into 
the 21st century.
This thesis has been driven by my own personal love of adventure sports. 
I have been an active participant in adventure sports, particularly 
climbing, mountaineering, kayaking, hill running and mountain biking for 
almost twenty years and have participated at a high level (e.g. expeditions 
to Kyrgyzstan and Greenland with the objective of first ascents of 
unclimbed peaks; ice and winter climbing in the UK and abroad, rock 
climbing and mountaineering around the world, hill running and 
mountain marathon running, white water kayaking in the UK and 
Europe).
12
During this time I became a fully qualified mountain instructor and 
walking leader and have worked in the guiding and instruction industry. I 
have also been a committee member and president of the Junior 
Mountaineering Club of Scotland (Glasgow) and a committee member of 
the Scottish Mountaineering Club (SMC), Scotland’s most senior 
climbing club – holders of the list of Munro Compleatists [sic!] and
publisher of the definitive Scottish climbing guides.
As both a media academic and an adventure sports participant over the 
past twenty years I have been an avid follower of the climbing and 
adventure sports media and have amassed an extensive collection of 
literature including autobiographies, guidebooks, magazines, films,
documentaries and online media. My full immersion into the subculture 
of adventure sports on numerous levels, i.e. as a participant, as an 
instructor, on an organisational level and lastly as media lecturer 
interested in all communication output of the sports has allowed me a 
unique insight into adventure sports from a variety of perspectives. The 
different roles I have held throughout my involvement with these 
activities and the resulting experiences at various subcultural levels have 
been the driving force behind carrying out this piece of research.
13
Chapter 2: Literature Review - Questions of media, culture and 
sport
Introduction
Section 1: Sports in society
Section 2: Sports in cultural / media studies
Gender, sport and media studies
Sporting subculture 
Consumer society and the commodification of sport
Section 3: MediaSport
Section 4: Changing views of sports
Section 5: Conclusion
14
Introduction
Sport has become acknowledged as more than just a game, a leisure 
pursuit or something to do to keep fit, but a social structure that is 
inextricably linked to other social structures such as the economy, 
political networks, class, gender, global connections and social networks
(e.g. Boyle & Haynes, 2009; Creedon, 1994; Goldlust, 1987; Hargreaves, 
1986; Hargreaves, 1994; Horne, 2006; Jarvie, 2006; Jhally, 1989; 
Kinkema & Harris, 1998; Lamprecht & Stamm, 2002; MacKay & 
Dallaire, 2012; Rowe, 2004; Wenner, 1998; Westerbeek & Smith, 2003; 
Wheaton, 2007). Until the late 20th century, sport and particularly media 
sport was a distinctly underexplored area, but in the last two decades 
there has been an exponential rise in sports research. This has been 
demonstrated by the emergence of sports sociology as a distinct field with 
its own dedicated journals and also by the increased interest of scholars 
from a variety of academic backgrounds in sport. 
Whilst looking at the subculture of adventure sports, this thesis is firmly 
based within the sphere of media studies. Both media studies themselves 
and to an even greater extent media sports studies are inherently of an 
interdisciplinary nature and hence this thesis will draw upon writers and 
theories from a range of fields such as media studies, cultural studies, 
sports sociology and sports communication.
The aim of this chapter is to review and interpret academic sports 
literature with regard to the conceptualisation of the relationship between 
sport, media and culture which are of importance to this research. The 
aim of this review cannot be to provide an entirely comprehensive review 
15
of this ever-widening field, but to highlight themes, trends and issues that 
are of relevance to this research project. 
Section 1: Sport and society
This section examines the theoretical concepts and debates that have 
impacted on and driven the development of the study of sport in social 
sciences. This is an area of enquiry that gathered impetus amongst the 
peripheries of researchers from both the fields of physical education and 
sociology and has developed into a ever growing field of academic study 
in its own right (e.g. Giulianotti 2012; Jarvie & Thornton, 2012). Initially 
much frowned upon by established sociologists, the main thrust of the 
research was employing functionalist approaches to society and geared 
towards the study of sport within the sociological traditions of 
occupational sociology, stratification of society and social organisation 
(Wenner, 1998). 
In his review of sport sociology Sage (1997) defined the starting point as 
the early 1960s and highlights Kenyon and Loy’s article (1965) Toward a 
sociology of sport as one of the stepping stones in the development of the 
area. However, it wasn’t until the 1970s that the first textbooks appeared 
focusing on sport sociology. At that stage, there was still very little 
reference to the relationship of sport and the media. Wenner (1998) states 
that this lack of attention to the media component of sport 
commodification is likely to be connected to the fact that the traditions of 
media study in sociology were largely being transplanted to 
communication and media study units in the 1960s and 1970s. ‘The net 
result was that by the time big media met big money, little media study 
remained in departments of sociology’ (1998: 8). It is not surprising then
16
that the development of sport research seemed to fall not into one specific 
area, but happened in a constant debate and struggle between scholars 
from peripheral areas of sociology and cultural / media studies. 
A number of paradigms have dominated academic sports literature since 
its emergence. Sudgen and Tomlinson (2002) provide a very good 
overview of the development of theory and method for a critical 
sociology of sport. They state that much of the early research into sport 
was based in either an agency or structure paradigm and that it was only 
recently that writers tried to move away from this dichotomous debate. 
Much of the writing has taken place in a structure paradigm that bases 
itself upon Marxist analysis. From this viewpoint, sport can be interpreted 
as being a key institution in the process of creating an ‘ideological sphere 
of capitalism that prevents workers from seeing the reality of their 
exploitation and [convincing] them to identify with the system that 
dominates them’ (Jhally, 1989). Sport can be seen as representing other 
areas of a capitalist society in which capital is used to distribute power 
unequally. As Clarke & Critcher point out, ‘People do make choices (and 
not only in leisure), but these choices are made within the structures of 
constraint which order their lives’ (1985: 46). Other writers have gone 
beyond this interpretation and have not only focused on sport as part of 
capitalist ideology, but have also introduced the notion of ritual (Real, 
1975; Alt, 1983). In this context sport is understood to be a celebration of 
the central value systems of the dominant order with the sporting event 
functioning as both a propaganda vehicle and as a commodified spectacle 
fulfilling the social and emotional needs of the masses. 
A different viewpoint is taken by the supporters of an agency approach 
who see pluralism as the defining element of society. In a pluralistic 
17
system, the individual makes decisions based upon a number factors. And 
although power might be an aspect that comes into it, it is open to 
individuals to move freely between more and less powerful parts of 
society. 
Whannel has suggested that this divergence of approaches has ‘persisted 
and continue[s] to mark media and cultural studies in the postmodern era’ 
(1992: 5). In his book Fields in Vision – Television Sport and Cultural 
Transformation he argues that there is an increased need to try and move 
away from this polarised view. He agrees with David Morley (2004) that 
it is important to avoid romanticism of consumer freedoms on the one 
hand and a paranoid fantasy of global capitalist control on the other. 
Sudgen and Tomlinson (2002) highlight Giddens’ (1984) ideas as being 
at the forefront of synthesising various parts of the debate and presenting 
them in a new type of sociology that is based on power relations. One 
important author who has greatly influenced this point of view is Michel 
Foucault. Foucault’s work on the body and the power/discourse dialectic 
(1972; 1977; 1981) captured the imagination of social theorists,
particularly British cultural studies and feminist cultural studies which in 
turn have been used by scholars in sport sociology. Rail and Harvey 
(1995) identify that apart from this indirect influence there is another way 
in which Foucault has impacted on sociology of sport. In their excellent 
review of Michel Foucault’s influence on sport they observe that his work 
has paved the way for a positioning of the body at the centre of research 
questions. They state that ‘the impact of Foucault has been to facilitate 
the theorization of the body as a site of cultural political struggles such as 
those seen in relation to AIDS, eugenics and new reproductive 
18
technologies, the Human Genome project, the “war on drugs”, racism, 
ageism, sexism, and heterosexism’ (1995: 168).
Supporters of the Foucauldian perspective reject the use of totalising 
theories such as Feminism or Marxism and put the significance of 
‘structural’ forces such as patriarchy or capitalism as tools of explanation 
into context. Instead the term ‘power’ is used and it is understood as 
being multi-located and multifarious. However, this inherent relativism of 
the Foucauldian perspective and its vagueness or neglect of issues of 
structure such as social class, race or gender has also been the focal point
of critics of his approach.
According to Foucault (1981), power is a term for the constant struggle 
between different forces in a particular society, but is not necessarily an 
institution or a structure. 
[Its] existence depends on a multiplicity of points of resistance: 
these play the role of adversary, target, support, or handle power 
relations. These points of resistance are present everywhere in the 
power network…There is plurality of resistances, each of them a 
special case: resistances that are possible, necessary, improbable; 
others that are spontaneous, savage, solitary, concerted, rampant, or 
violent; still others that are quick to compromises, interested, or 
sacrificial; by definition, they can only exist in the field of power 
relations. (Foucault, 1981: 95-96)
What Foucault refers to here is that power is not unidirectional and that 
the individual, although faced with constraints of power networks, has at 
the same time various options of resistance at hand. This notion of power 
relations has been widely used to study sport as a cultural form by authors 
such as de Certeau (1988) and Fiske (1989). Approaches of these types 
are very useful for researching culture as everyday life and are clearly 
19
providing a useful underpinning for taking an ethnographic approach to 
understanding adventure sports.
Section 2: Sports in cultural / media studies
This section explores concepts and ideas that have shaped the 
understanding of sport from a cultural studies perspective. Emphasis is 
placed on issues of gender, culture / subculture and identity as they are of 
particular relevance to the work in the following chapters.
Media sports studies has also been subjected to analysis from supporters 
of the neo-marxist / cultural studies approach (e.g. Cashmore, 1982;
Creedon, 1994; Hargreaves, 1986; Hargreaves, 2002; Willis, 1982). The 
growth of the cultural studies perspective has indeed been identified as 
giving sport sociology a substantial boost, particularly in the late 1980s 
and early 1990s. In this area a number of different issues such as gender, 
race, class and identity formation have been highlighted and explored. An 
important influence has been the theoretical framework of hegemony that 
was developed in pivotal works such as Antonio Gramsci’s Selections 
from the Prison Notebooks (1971), Raymond Williams’ Culture and 
Society (1961) and Thompson’s Making of the English Working Class
(1968). These amongst others formed the basis for the field of critical 
sports studies writers (e.g. John Clarke; Chas Critcher; Richard Gruneau; 
Alan Tomlinson) to determine the relationship between culture and sport, 
what is culture and who makes the decisions about what is and what is 
not culture. One of the canonical texts in the area is John Hargreaves 
Sport, Power and Culture: A Social and Historical Analysis of Popular 
Sports in Britain (1986) in which he traces the rise and fall of hegemonic 
20
processes in the world of sport and links them to dominant economic and 
political forces in Great Britain. Hargreaves’ achievement lies in the 
provision of a chronicle of the institutionalisation of sport by using the 
dynamics of class life. This was the first major critical work on sport to 
use hegemony as its focus and was heavily influenced by Gramsci and 
Foucault. The struggle between dominant and subordinate groups that has 
influenced and continues to influence British society is used to explain 
how cultural / social forms such as sport evolve, operate and vary in 
meaning. It is, however, interesting and curious that Hargreaves identifies 
a leading role of the mass media in the achievement of hegemony (1986:
138), but only devotes one short chapter to the analysis of media sport.
More recently, numerous critical studies on sport have developed and 
branched out from the neo-Marxist influence on earlier studies. Examples 
include Barry Smart’s (2005) The Sport Star: Modern Sport and the 
Cultural Economy of Sporting Celebrity, Giulianotti & Robertson’s 
(2007) Globalization and Sport, Whannel’s (2008) Culture, Politics and 
Sport: Blowing the Whistle and Horne, Tomlinson, Whannel & 
Woodward’s (2013) Understanding Sport to mention just a few. The 
continued relevance of Marxist approaches to understanding sport in 
today’s society has also been discussed and analysed more recently in 
works such as the reader on Marxism, Cultural Studies and Sport edited 
by Carrington & McDonald (2009).
Gender, sport and media studies
Since the 1970s, feminist researchers have written extensively on the 
issue of sport, gender and the degree to which the media contribute to the 
oppression of marginalised groups such as women (e.g. Bernstein, 2002a; 
21
Blain & Bernstein, 2003; Birrell & Theberge, 1994; Creedon, 1994; 
Hargreaves, 2002; Vincent, Imwold, Johnson & Massey, 2003; Kay & 
Laberge 2002, MacKay & Dallaire, 2012; Wheaton, 2002; Wheaton 
2007; Willis, 1982).
Willis, Creedon and Hargreaves amongst others have focused on gender 
differences in sport sociology. Hargreaves argued that in much of the 
literature the experiences of women have generally been ignored:
But although all these issues are connected to relationships of power 
between different agents, and in particular to gender relations of 
power, a common characteristic of the various sports sociology 
perspectives is the marginalization of women’s experiences and 
relationships of gender. In this respect, the history of sports 
sociology reflects the long history of male domination of modern 
sports and dominant ideas about sexual difference. (Hargreaves, 
2002: 7)
In the same vein, Willis (1982) argues that women’s performances are 
only valid by comparisons with men’s and hence sport serves mainly to 
reproduce women’s subordination. Since the 1980s feminist scholarship 
has increasingly investigated the power relations that underlie the 
construction of gender difference and also ways in which images are 
constructed in the media. Media representations of active women such as 
in beach volleyball, aerobics or boxing are brought together with 
dominant hegemonic relationships. And as Boyle and Haynes (2009) 
point out, sport is still one of the areas of media in which representations 
of women and men remain very conservative. They quite rightly state that 
the ‘sex/gender system as it is reproduced in sport is one site where 
patriarchal cultural hegemony can be challenged and that it is important 
to address the possibility that transforming sport may help to break down 
22
stereotypical representation of the sexes as they are framed by the media.’ 
(Boyle & Haynes, 2009: 123)
There have been numerous studies elucidating the problems that women 
face in sport. MacNeill (1988) for example highlighted that by continuing 
to associate women more with appearance than performance in sport, 
male dominance is being reproduced. Halbert and Latimer (1994) have 
emphasised the continued trivialisation women experience at the hand of 
sports broadcasters. On the opposite side there have been studies focusing 
on masculine imagery which has traditionally been at the centre of 
sporting discourse (e.g. Whannel, 1992; Nixon, 1996). However, some, 
particularly early feminist writers, who have focused on gender and sport, 
have been criticised for trying to isolate gender from other factors that 
come into play such as class and race. The debate has subsequently 
moved beyond early deterministic accounts in which men and women 
were portrayed in a simplistic, oppositional model. Dewar (1993) has 
analysed the differences between women in relationship to age, class, 
ethnic background, sexuality and disability; Birrell and Theberge (1994) 
and Whitson (1994) have written about factors such as resistance, agency 
and empowerment.
According to Daddario, issues surrounding gender research can be 
grouped into four categories (Daddario, 1998: 10-11): 1) Issues that relate 
to physiological differences between males and females which have been 
institutionalised in sport and the sports media and used to legitimise 
gender-differentiated and gender-exclusive sport. 2) Issues that relate to 
the conditions under which women are visible and invisible in sport and 
the sports media. 3) Issues that are concerned with how the media
contribute to the perpetuation of gender stereotypes in sport. 4) Studies 
23
on gender differences in sports spectatorship and the differences in 
pleasure men and women derive from their viewing experiences.
This is a very useful categorisation of issues on gender and sport and the 
work in the following chapters will be covering aspects similar to those 
found in categories 1, 2 and 3. 
At the end of the last century, Duncan & Messner (1998) pointed out that 
women’s participation in sport has increased dramatically in the last fifty 
years, but despite a greater number of female athletes and better sports 
programmes, the sports media have been noticeably slow in their uptake 
on these changes. Successful female athletes still received negative 
media commentary if they are perceived as being heavily muscled or nonfeminine. E.g. the American world champion Marion Jones attracted 
rather derogatory and non-performance related comments in an article in 
the London Evening Standard, 23 July 1998: 
‘…I am damned if I could tell whether it was male or female …no 
breasts, no feminine contours. Just power. Hugely muscled 
thighs…All things considered, though, give me Joyce Greenfell any 
time.’ 
Now, well into the next century, the situation hasn’t changed 
dramatically. Kane and Maxwell (2011) still support the position that the 
continued sexualisation and trivialization of sports women in the media 
are the main vehicle for the reproduction of male dominance in sport. 
Weber & Carini (2013) in their analysis of Sports Illustrated covers over 
a ten year period found ‘little evidence of a meaningful change’ (2013: 
201). They bemoan the lack of change in the important sports media and 
state: ‘Our analysis suggests a continuing pattern of anemic 
24
representation of women on the cover of SI…’ (ibid.). They agree with 
other authors such as Messner and Cooky (2010) that the situation is so 
slow to change because it is a complex social issue and a number of 
factors would have to be addressed besides simply demanding a greater 
exposure of female athletes in the media. This includes ‘greater 
representation of women in sports organisations and media outlets, as 
well as fan bases that insist on more quantitative and less sexist media 
treatment of female athletes’ (Weber & Carini, 2013: 202).
Duncan & Messner’s notion of 1998 that sport provides opportunities for 
men to assert their dominance in times when male hegemony is 
challenged in other areas of life still seems to go a long way (1998: 170).
There has been an extraordinary amount of research over the last ten 
years focusing on feminist studies of sport (Bernstein, 2002; Kayne & 
Buisse, 2005; MacKay & Dallaire, 2012; Messner & Cooky, 2010; 
Vincent, Imwold, Johnson & Massey, 2003). Amongst other items,
scholars have been investigating representations of sportswomen in both 
alternative and mainstream media and whether women’s sports are 
gaining more equitable coverage. The overwhelming evidence appears to 
be that there is a continued asymmetrical coverage. Many scholars have 
found that the media continue to downplay athletic achievements of 
women or to allocate less coverage to women’s sport then their 
achievements would merit (Messner & Cooky, 2010; Weber & Carini, 
2013; Bernstein, 2002). The major concerns scholars have highlighted 
are as follows: Firstly, only what is perceived as a gender appropriate 
sport such as gymnastics receives good coverage (e.g. Vincent, Imwold, 
Masemann & Johnson, 2002). Secondly, in coverage there is a continued 
trivialization by referencing/prioritising of appearance over sporting 
25
prowess. Thirdly, coverage is often linked to socially constructed gender 
stereotypes with frequent references to women’s roles in society such as 
the role of mother, girlfriend or daughter. This continues to reproduce the 
pattern of male hegemony in heterosexual relationships as pointed out by 
Hargreaves as early as the 1980s (Hargreaves, 1986).
Whilst many researchers identify that trivialisation and marginalisation of 
female sportswomen still exists and that the power structure is still 
skewed in favour of male dominance, there are others who point out that 
in many sports it is not that simple anymore. Thorpe (2005) did not want 
to ‘conceive of female snow boarding experiences in terms of a dialectic 
struggle between empowerment and constraint’ (2005: 95), but developed 
the theory that ‘resistance to, and complicity with, traditional notions of 
femininity coexist within the same cultural space’ (ibid.). She interprets 
this as a positive sign for a future where gender order might be 
renegotiated not only in sport, but also in society as a whole. Others, 
such as MacKay & Dallaire, see opportunities for young sportswomen to 
act out their gender identities through new media texts (2012: 19). In their 
study on a female skateboarding blog (skirtboarders.com), they came to 
the conclusion that young women are managing to challenge dominant 
discourses of femininity through the Internet. They state: ‘Therefore, 
skirtboarders might be enacting a third-wave feminist politic that suggests 
an awareness of gender inequity in mainstream and alternative 
(skateboarding) media and a desire to (re)present themselves differently 
without claiming to be feminists’ (ibid.).
Sporting subculture
26
The main focus of this thesis is on adventure sports, which can also be 
referred to as ‘lifestyle sports’, a concept that will be explored further 
later on. In adventure sports such as climbing, kayaking or mountain 
biking, participants have been described as being in search of a particular 
way of living that sets them apart from other people in society (Wheaton, 
2000b). 
Sport has been defined as being essentially social in nature. As Huizinga 
put it: ‘It promotes the formation of social groupings’ (1970: 13). 
Although these sports are based on individual participation and as such 
have often been interpreted as a sign of the increased individualism in 
both society in general and sports in particular (Whannel, 1992), 
participants buy into the social identity of a subcultural group. Identity 
can be taken to mean in this context what participants have in common 
with each other and what sets them apart from other groups in society, i.e. 
differentiation from and similarity with others. There has been a great 
debate about the extent to which alternative forms of sports offer 
opportunities for a ‘real’ opposition and resistance to broader societal 
issues. In his article on the ESPN X Games, Rinehart states: ‘Participants 
of these action sports, particularly, have established complex and intricate 
forms of resistance to the attempted dominance of ESPN’s X Games’ 
(2008:180). 
It is also important at this stage to define the understanding of the term 
subculture. Crosset & Beal (1997), in their extremely elucidating article 
on the use and misuse of the terms subculture and subworld agree with 
Yinger (1960) who employs the term subculture to illuminate the 
normative system by which groups demonstrate ways they ‘differ in such 
27
things as language, values, religion, diet and style of life from the larger 
social world of which they are part’. They state:
The prefix “sub” in subculture and subworld signifies the level of 
analysis which is below the macro level and focuses on an 
intermediate level of society. An intermediate analysis can make 
explicit the everyday meanings of society by investigating how 
people interpret and respond to interactions within groups as well as 
investigate how dominant relations are reproduced, challenged and 
negotiated on a daily level. (Crosset & Beal, 1997: 74)
The theoretical development of subculture as a concept in the UK was
driven by the influential Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies at 
Birmingham. Starting in the 1970s, the CCCS has arguably provided the 
most sustained analysis and debate of subculture amongst the academic 
community and has provided a rich legacy which has formed the basis for
further important works such as Redhead’s Subculture to Clubcultures
(Redhead, 1997), Donnelly’s (1998) work on sport as site of popular 
resistance and Beal’s (1995) work on skateboarding. Seminal works such 
as Hall and Jefferson’s Resistance through Rituals (2006), first published 
in 1975, understood authentic subcultural youth identity as being 
demonstrated in a collective and cohesive cultural resistance to the 
dominant order. Hebdige’s Subculture: The Meaning of Style (1979) built
on this work to provide a comprehensive and complex analysis of postwar youth subcultures. Whilst his analysis focuses mainly on music 
subcultures such as rastas, teds, mods and punks, his argument still held 
considerable interest for those analysing sporting subcultures (e.g.
Thornton, 2004).
Hebdige sees subcultures as expressive forms who use style as a way to 
show a fundamental tension between those in power and those without 
28
(Hebdige, 1979: 132). Subcultural style offers the subculture’s 
participants the opportunity to resist the ruling ideology reproduced 
through traditional social institutions such as family, education, mass 
media and the state. He says:
[…], I have interpreted subculture as a form of resistance in which 
experienced contradictions and objections to this ruling ideology are
obliquely represented in style (Hebdige, 1979: 133).
One of the interesting observations of Hebdige is that, generally
speaking, different subcultures all develop in a similar way. Initially 
formed as a mode of resistance, they tend to soon be discovered and 
infiltrated by commercial agents who use the group’s special descriptors 
and identifiers to produce a commodified reincarnation of itself. The 
commodification and perhaps accompanying commercialisation leads to 
the subculture’s continued integration into the mainstream. This ‘process 
of recuperation’ (1979: 94) usually takes two forms, the commodity form 
‘through the conversion of subcultural signs’ and the ideological form, 
the labelling and re-definition of deviant behaviour by dominant groups 
(ibid.). Hebdige’s analysis offers a very useful perspective for
understanding adventure sports subcultures where both of those processes 
are clearly taking place, but in particular commodification is having an 
increasing impact on their status within society as shown by a number of 
authors such as Beal (1995) and Donnelly (1998).
Increasingly the work of the CCCS was seen as too simplistic and 
romanticising the effects of subcultures (Wheaton, 2010; Young & 
Atkinson, 2008). A more complex interaction of mainstream and 
29
subculture is stipulated where there is room for negotiation, co-option and 
resistance (Rinehart, 2008).
Although not all of the differentiating descriptors discussed earlier will fit 
the participants of extreme sports, this thesis will adopt the term 
“subculture” for its analysis. The crucial factor is that subculture is 
understood as being in opposition to the predominant normative system, 
but still tied to the norms and expectations of the larger culture (see for 
example Beal, 1995; Donnelly, 1998 and Thornton, 2004).
It has been argued that the media play a substantial part in maintaining 
the social spirit of subcultural groupings. But however important the 
media are for fostering the collective identification among members in a 
social group (Boyle & Haynes, 2009: 13), they are only part of a complex 
relationship that binds the individual to their subculture or larger social 
grouping. This is an important observation that will influence the work in 
this thesis by not focusing on the media alone, but by widening the 
perspective to encompass other social factors such as cultural, economic 
and political forces that are in interplay with the media.
Consumer society and the commodification of sport
In the last 20 years, the concept of commodification has become one of 
the most important factors for understanding sport in society. The 
commodification thesis proposes that in a contemporary globalised 
economy, not only traditional goods such as cars and computers are being 
sold as commodities, but also other areas of life such as relationships, 
family and sport are being packaged, marketed and traded. 
30
Giulianotti & Robertson amongst others have referred to this process 
within the sporting context as ‘hyper-commodification’ (Giulianotti & 
Robertson, 2007). Not only are sports performances being sold at an everincreasing level, but there is also a secondary side to this where money is 
being made through sponsorship, product endorsements, sports 
merchandise and broadcasting contracts. This secondary side is fostered 
through the emergence and establishment of an advertising and 
promotional culture around sport. Horne et al. highlight how a new group 
of professional people involved with sport such as ‘sports agents, 
sponsorship brokers, event managers and public relations consultants’ are 
intervening in the economic relations of the sports world and driving up 
the ‘inflation of value’ (2013: 187).
The ideas surrounding the commodification thesis promise to be of great 
value for analysing and understanding developments within the world of 
adventure sports where sports gear and merchandise is increasingly big 
business and manufacturers are continuously competing to flood the 
market with new apparel, clothing, equipment, DVDs and other related 
items. Authors such as MacKay & Dallaire (2012), Thorpe (2005) and 
Wheaton (2004) have discussed how alternative or lifestyle sports have 
adapted and changed through the process of commodification, but also 
how they have embraced and fought internal subcultural battles to resist 
changes such as ‘selling-out’ to become institutionalised through the 
establishment of for example competitions, regulatory frameworks or 
joining the Olympics (Rinehart, 2008, Thorpe & Wheaton, 2011; 
Wheaton, 2010).
31
Many writers have suggested that this commodification or hypercommodification has had a negative impact on the sporting world, 
undermining the traditional values and changing some of the sports 
forever. As Rowe (2004) puts it, we only need to ‘point to the cut-throat 
competition and multi-million dollar and pound investment involved in 
acquiring such mega media sports properties as the broadcast rights to the 
Summer and Winter Olympics, English Premier League Soccer and US 
National Football League’ (2004: 69).
The argument for the negative impact of commercialisation is a 
convincing one. However, there are also opinions emerging which point 
out that the process of commercialisation is complex and happening at 
multiple levels. Using the example of beach volleyball, Horne et al. state:
Emergent sports that become commercialised, systematised and 
marketed, such as beach volleyball, nevertheless still continue to 
exist in casualised and simplified forms. Beach volleyball has 
acquired an organised and competitive form but is still played, for 
fun, on the beach. In other words, the sport has been characterised 
by a remorseless transformation of casual leisure, but also by 
retention of values of casual, informal and spontaneous play and 
indeed by forms of resistance to commercial incorporation (Horne et 
al., 2013: 192).
The concept of commodification is closely linked to the notion of 
consumption which is central to understanding postmodern culture and 
society. In the 20th century, the popular appeal of sport was growing 
exponentially around the world and sport was becoming truly global. 
This is demonstrated by the ‘growth of international sporting bodies, 
competitions, tournaments, migratory flows of competitors and associated 
globally extensive forms of media representation’ (Smart, 2007: 114). 
As consumption has become an increasingly important factor in how we 
32
develop and form our identities (Horne, 2006), this sphere offers a rich 
area for analysing sports using themes such as gender, race, authenticity, 
group identity and inclusion.
Section 3: MediaSport
A lot of writing on sports from a media studies perspective has focused 
on the impact the media have on those sports, particularly the close 
interdependency between the two as newspapers and broadcasters have 
come to be dependent on sports as much as the sports are on them.1 Boyle 
and Haynes (2009: 7) state that the ‘media are playing a central role in 
producing, reproducing and amplifying many of the discourses associated 
with sport in the modern world’. Hence, one could say that sport and the 
media have a symbiotic relationship and depend on each other for the 
maintenance of their position in popular culture and their commercial 
success. To describe this relationship Jhally (1989) has coined the term 
the “sports/media complex” which refers to the close connection and 
interrelationship that has been established between the media, particularly 
television, and spectator sports. He developed a comprehensive 
framework for the study of mediated sport trying to synthesise previous 
work from within cultural studies: 
…what is called for is a thorough, non-reductive analysis of the 
articulation of mediated sports to social, cultural, political, sexual, 
racial and economic factors – in short, a totalistic theory of sport and 
society and sport in society. (Jhally, 1989: 92)
1 See Kinkema and Harris (1998) for a full, overarching review of Media Sport studies.
33
 
Essentially, what has come to be at the centre of interest of media sports 
writers is the process of transformation that derives from the interaction 
of the media and sport. Thompson summarises this theme as follows:
Pop music, sports and other activities are largely sustained by the 
media industries, which are not merely involved in the transmission 
and financial support of pre-existing cultural forms, but also in the 
active transformation of these forms. (Thompson, 1990: 163)
What media sports writers such as Blain et al (1993), Boyle & Haynes 
(2009), Goldlust (1987), Rowe (2004) and Whannel (1992) are 
increasingly focusing on is a more comprehensive analysis of the 
complex relationship between capital, the media and sport, particularly as 
a vehicle of popular culture. Rowe summarises the requirements for 
mediasport analysis very well:
The requirement is not to treat the sport-media nexus as a closed 
system of commercial exploitation, massified communication and 
unreflexive image consumption, but to acquire the critical means to 
establish an authoritative grasp of the structural, institutional and 
organizational framework governing their production, dissemination 
and reception. (Rowe, 2004: 8)
Essentially, what this means is that mediasport writing has to move away 
from an analysis that tries to view components of the process in isolation 
such as institutions, texts and audiences. Much work (Boyle and Haynes, 
2009; Rowe 2004) has therefore focused on understanding the political 
economy of the sports media without neglecting media sports texts. The 
media are defined as driving economic and cultural forces that have the
power to change sport as they deliver information to audiences which in 
turn may generate further capital and more sport. Boyle & Haynes call 
the media the ‘economic underwriter of modern sport’ (2009: 13). 
34
Examples are numerous, for example the extension of the Olympic 
Games from 15 to 17 days so that the coverage can be focused around 
two weekends to boost viewing figures and hence advertising budgets, or 
the transformation of Snooker into the most televised and most watched 
sport on British television in the ‘80s – a feat of careful dramatisation and 
scheduling (ibid.: 72), also a feature of large football events such as the 
Champions League, European Cup or the World Cup (Boyle & 
O’Connor, 1993).
Another important aspect of the sport-media nexus that has been explored 
is the construction of sport as a media event and the reflection and 
reinforcement of dominant social values. The construction of sporting 
contests into media events has now been scrutinised quite closely (Boyle 
& Haynes, 2009; Coakley, 1998; Kinkema & Harris, 1998; Rowe, 2004) 
and it has been suggested that sports media events do not simply deliver 
packaged entertainment, but they also deliver and reinforce beliefs about 
many social issues such as gender, nationalism, age, race, ability and 
class.
Sport media – TV vs. print media and the Internet
Much of the research on sport in the media mentioned above has focused 
on television (for example Whannel’s seminal work on sport and TV in 
1992; Barnett, 1990; Wenner, 1989). Clearly, TV is the ideal medium to 
relate the excitement of a sporting event to the viewers through live 
broadcasts and hence has attracted great research interest. Boyle and 
Haynes have paid particular attention to what they call the sporting 
triangle: television, sponsorship and sport which they see as ‘the key 
35
drivers in shaping sport as a cultural and ideological form and as a 
commercial / business entity’ (Boyle & Haynes, 2009: 13). 
However, print media with their possibilities for more detailed analysis 
and background information have been given much less attention by 
media researchers. One of the reasons for focusing on television is 
perhaps the increased visuality of society, but also the added dimensions 
of sports fees and large scale sport advertising / sponsorship opportunities 
the medium has to offer. However, print media and their sports coverage 
offer a very interesting and potentially fruitful area of analysis for media 
sports scholars. Sports writing and particularly football writing has
become a genre in its own right. One of the original, influential studies on 
sports coverage in the print media has been by Blain, Boyle and 
O’Donnell (1993) who analysed more than 3,000 press items from ten 
European countries on the Barcelona Olympics 1992, Wimbledon 1991 
and some other events with the aim of interpreting the construction of 
European and national identity in the media through sport. Crolley & 
Hand also attempted to address the dearth of research on the print media 
and football in their study on Football, Europe and the Press (2002). 
They state that football is one of the important elements of print media 
discourse and highlight the economic necessity of football coverage for a 
newspaper’s survival:
As the socio-economic importance to Europe of sport begins to rise, 
it becomes ever more unthinkable that a publication claiming the 
title of ‘newspaper’ could survive commercially without 
increasingly extensive and successful coverage of sport in general 
and football in particular. (Crolley & Hand, 2002: 1)
36
Their work on football and the press in England, Spain and France reemphasises the significant role the media representation of football plays 
in the construction of national and group identities. 
Some authors (Boyle, 2006; Steen, 2008) have turned their attention to 
issues of new sport media providers as their increased usage and 
interactivity lends itself very well to analysis. New media now occupy a 
substantial part of the sports media sector as pointed out by researchers 
such as Boyle & Haynes and Sandvoss (Boyle & Haynes, 2009; 
Sandvoss, 2003). Boyle (2006) provided a comprehensive analysis of the 
impact of changes in the sports media field and highlighted issues such as 
the impact of digital technology on professional practice and the
increasing influence of public relations practices. During the 2000 
Olympic games in Sydney for example, the official website of the games 
was visited 9.7 billion times (Beck, 2001: 4); Sportsline USA counted 
seven million page views per day in 1998, the US Major League Baseball 
attracted over 110,000 online subscribers to MLB.com and ESPN.com 
was registering in excess of seven million users in 2001 (Westerbeek & 
Smith, 2003: 156). A decade later (2013), these figures now seem small, 
as even a non-mainstream sports website can now attract increasingly 
large numbers. One of the main sites for the niche sport of climbing 
www.ukclimbing.com attracts approximately over 7 million visits a year (as 
of 2011) and the leading German sport portal www.sport1.de receives about 
40 million visits a month. Interesting in this context are also sport 
computer games which are appealing particularly to specific subcultures. 
Especially for adventure sports, new media offer specialised services and 
interaction with audiences that have no or little place in traditional media 
such as television – a thesis that has been stipulated by others such as 
Boyle & Haynes (2004) and Sandvoss (2003).
37
Section 4: Changing views of sports
In this section I will explore what people have come to understand sport 
to be and to position adventure sports within this. There is now a 
bourgeoning body of scholarly work dealing with adventure sports and 
the media (e.g. Gilchrist, 2007; Heywood, 2006; Thorpe 2005 and
MacKay & Dallaire, 2012 amongst others). Some interesting work has 
also been carried out in the usage of such sports in advertising and 
marketing and this will be discussed below. 
An important question to address first of all is whether and to what 
extent these activities can be described as sports. As Kusz (2004) points 
out: many ‘sports fans and pundits initially dismissed extreme sports as 
made-for-TV pseudo-sports created solely to peddle products to the 
much coveted teen male demographic’ (2004:198) and were ‘publicly 
derided as the sporting outgrowth of the short-attention spans, nihilistic 
desires, and aberrant worldviews of wayward Generation Xers’ (ibid.). 
Some writers have stipulated that they perhaps better fitted the 
description of ‘play’ than ‘sport’ (e.g. Howe, 2003; Stranger, 1999) 
Critics of adventure sports often mention the lack of competition as a 
distinguishing factor, however, others such as Thorpe when writing 
about snowboarding have pointed out that lifestyle sports ‘quickly took 
on the trappings of other modern sports: rationalized systems of rules, 
hierarchical and individualistic star systems, the creation of heroes and 
heroines and rebel athletes who look like walking corporate billboards’ 
(2005: 77). 
38
What is often overlooked is that the competition is not necessarily 
between athletes or teams, but between individuals and nature. A very 
fitting definition comes from Tony Mason who defined sport as ‘a more 
or less physically strenuous, competitive, recreational 
activity…usually…in the open air [which] might involve team against 
team, athlete against athlete or athlete against nature, or the clock’ 
(Mason, 1989: 4-5). 
Alternative lifestyle sports have started to make their way into the 
limelight of mainstream media. This is partly due to the problem of 
financial losses incurred by broadcasters of traditional sports such as 
Football, Formula 1 or Rugby, but also through the growing interest of 
audiences and hence big business in what sometimes is grouped under the 
catch-all banners ‘funsport, adventure sport or fringe sport’. Although 
audiences are still growing, broadcasters have found it increasingly 
difficult to cover expensive license fees which has resulted in a number 
of spectacular media business disasters such as the downfall of the Kirchgroup and ITV Digital. For example the 2001 final of the Champions 
League, Bayern München versus Valencia, attracted a record number of 
16 million viewers, but still failed to cover the German channel RTL’s 
expenses (Beck, 2001: 1).
The advertising industry has clearly identified the increased interest in 
extreme sports and now frequently uses extreme sport sequences to 
promote ordinary products with the aim of lending an aura of the special, 
extraordinary or extreme – there have been white-water kayakers 
advertising men’s aftershave, new models of 4x4 off road vehicles have 
been promoted by towing wakeboarders and international insurance has 
been seen in the half-pipe. Bennett, Henson & Zhang (2002) in their 
39
article on extreme sports sponsorship recognition suggest that this 
development is not an accident, but is happening on the back of an 
expansive and increasing adventure sports industry. In a survey of 
American sports participation by American sports data (Gillis, 2001) an 
average growth of 1.8% in mainstream sports (such as tennis, basketball, 
baseball and golf) was observed between 1978 and 2000. Quite 
strikingly, the participation in alternative sports (including rock climbing, 
kayaking and mountain biking) was up by 244.7 % in the same time 
period. A decade later, a Mintel report from 2011 showed that 
participation has risen to about 118 million people aged 6 and older in the 
US alone who participated in one or more action and extreme sports at 
least once in 2009. Retail sales of action and extreme sports equipment 
and accessories covered in this report increased 8.8% in 2010 alone, 
reaching $2.4 billion (Mintel, 2011).
As in any other, more established discipline such as football, rugby or 
cricket, sports stars sell and can demand increasingly high fees for this. 
These fees have been steadily rising over the last decade although they 
can vary from sport to sport. Snow based adventure sports are often more 
aligned with mainstream sports, e.g. even ten years ago, at the start of the 
century, top snowboarder Shaun White had a million dollar sponsorship 
contract with Burton. On the other hand at the same time top rock climber 
Ben Moon had to be satisfied with a more modest fee of £30,000 for his 
efforts (On the Edge, November 2002). More recently, though, 
sponsorship monies seem to be more readily available for climbers. 
Although exact figures are hard to come by it is clear that no-one is likely 
to get rich as a sponsored climber. In an article on Outside online, the 
web interface of the American climbing magazine Outside, Alex Honnold 
is happy to admit to be able to make a living from sponsorship. He is 
40
sponsored by brands La Sportiva, Clif Bar, New England Ropes, Black 
Diamond, and The North Face. 
Honnold says he now makes enough sponsorship money "to support 
my climbing and save a little bit." He's also used some of the cash to 
upgrade his current vehicle, a 2002 Ford Econoline minivan that he 
lives in, with industrial carpeting, insulation, and a two-burner 
Coleman stove. “It used to be way more ghetto”, he says proudly. 
(Roberts, 2011)
This is still in stark contrast to sports such as mountain-biking which has
arguably been much more commercialised to date than sports such as 
kayaking and climbing. Top mountain-biker Ryan Leech states in an 
interview in 2012:
I’m a professional mountain biker, my prowess on a bike resulted in 
a fifteen year career with earnings of close to two million $ and an 
unlimited supply of the finest bicycle equipment available. 
(www.beamstruts.com, 15/02/12)
Rinehart (1998) and Kay and Laberge (2002a: 17) have defined extreme 
sports as sports that either ‘ideologically or practically provide 
alternatives to mainstream sports and their values’. Like many others (see 
e.g. Kusz, 2004) Kay and Laberge also pinpoint that increased 
commercialisation has changed these type of sports. They state:
Although the ‘anti-mainstream’ image of extreme sports is still 
apparent, its interdependent relationship with the media and 
corporate agents has de-emphasised – or even reversed – the 
oppositional ideology that marked its earlier motivation.
Kay and Laberge (2002b) have also clearly linked the rise of those types 
of ‘fringe’ sports to aspects of commercialisation. They claim that 
41
‘“adventure” has become a distinguishing brand and marketing strategy, 
co-opted and commodified to suggest and/or validate producers’ and 
products’ active membership’ and although they refer mainly to one 
specific type of sport – adventure racing – they clearly identify the 
difference between mainstream and those new types of sports. The 
difference lies in the notion of being a “lifestyle” sport, an integral and 
invested part of participants’ lives. This conforms with Coupland’s 
understanding of the action sport game as a ‘postmodern, selfconsciously constructed, result driven form of sport endeavour’ (1998: 
99). Other scholars have gone even further and stated that new 
generations are increasingly turning to and creating a new sport culture 
that is based on deinstitutionalisation, delocalisation, ecologisation, 
hybridisation and adventurisation (Pociello, 1999: 167-170). What this 
encapsulates is that participants of such a sport might be defined by great 
commitment to the lifestyle, but often also buy into an individualistic 
ideology which rejects institutionalisation (Wheaton, 2004). Many such 
sports take place in a globalised field and offer a wealth of opportunities 
for developing into more specialised subcategories.
Many recent studies are now highlighting the fact that the process of 
commercialisation cannot necessarily be seen as merely a one–way 
process of incorporation into the mainstream, but that to understand the 
process more fully ‘scholars need to move beyond simplistic 
understandings of commerzialisation as co-option and resistance, to 
capture the complexity and messiness of the process, and of the 
relationship between the cultural industries, participants and consumers’ 
(Wheaton, 2010:1065).
42
One important concept which will come into play for the analysis in this 
piece of work is the mediatisation thesis. Many researchers (Hjarvard, 
2008; Krotz, 2007) have argued that we now live in a time where the 
media can no longer be seen as separate from other areas of society and 
culture, but is part of everything that we do and engage with. Hjarvard 
states: 
Contemporary society is permeated by the media, to an extent that 
the media may no longer be conceived of as being separate from 
cultural and other social institutions. Under these circumstances, the 
task before us is instead to try to gain an understanding of the ways 
in which social institutions and cultural processes have changed 
character, function and structure in response to the omnipresence of 
media. (2008: 105-106)
So far, the mediatisation of sports such as climbing has mainly taken 
place at the interface between specialist and mainstream media, only 
reaching into the mainstream media on special occasions, particularly 
when accidents and fatalities occur or the highest mountains of the world 
or other superlatives are involved (Gilchrist, 2008). As people 
participating in such sports can already be described as forming a 
physical community, the introduction of the internet offered to transform 
these physical communities into virtual communities. As Westerbeek & 
Smith (2003) point out this is clearly not only the case for adventure 
sports fans, but also for mainstream supporters such as English cricket 
fans, Swedish tennis players or New Zealand rugby followers. However, 
they state that to date the media companies and marketers have been 
much less successful in fully embracing the mainstream market:
This was largely because the uptake of the Internet technology was 
too slow for the magnificent opportunities that were being offered, 
rather than consumers’ lack of interest in interactivity and control of 
43
the broadcast or because of unwillingness to engage with other fans 
of on-line communication. (Westerbeek & Smith, 2003: 168)
For adventure sports, the Internet has offered a medium that fits the 
overall ethos of a “lifestyle-sport” and underlines its niche and cult nature 
(ibid.). Despite the variety of sports on offer within the overarching field 
of extreme sports, the Internet has become a great success for media and 
marketing opportunities. At any given time during the day the most 
popular chat rooms such as ukclimbing.com and ukriversguide.co.uk are 
filled with people discussing issues related to the sport, reading the news 
updates on what has been done during the last week and checking out the 
ever so vital conditions reports on snow, ice and river levels to plan their 
weekend exploits. Ukclimbing is provided by one of the largest outdoor 
enterprises in the UK who cleverly combine their portal with unobtrusive 
links to very successful specialist on-line shops. This supports 
Westerbeek & Smith’s argument that extreme sports has achieved the 
‘paradigm-shift from distributor to consumer [that] has challenged sport 
enterprises to unlearn traditional methods of community building using 
other media’ (2003: 168-169). As many adventure sports can be 
understood as grassroots sports, i.e. rules have been developed from the 
ground up, and much of the reporting is carried out by competitors 
themselves, traditional methods of sports media are often less used or less 
respected (Wheaton & Beal, 2003).
Section 5: Conclusion 
44
In this literature review numerous approaches to sport and the media have 
been discussed ranging from the Marxist interpretation of sport as “the 
opium for the masses” to the agency approach that analyses sport within 
the context of the development and accommodation of popular culture by 
the cultural industries. The work of this project is interdisciplinary in 
nature and will not be entirely located within any one particular 
paradigm, but will attempt to draw on a number of different themes from 
the areas of relevant literature including 1) the sociology of sport 2) 
sociology of media sport 3) issues of gender and 4) issues of new media
and 5) how changes in the media have impacted on the role of sport in 
society.
The work that follows later examines the rise of adventure sports in the 
media. David Rowe in his book Sport, Culture and the Media states: 
Instead of the master narrative of consumer freedom versus mass 
oppression, there is a more modest and qualified attention paid to the 
historical and institutional conditions which produce outcomes that 
can only be pronounced upon after close and unprejudiced 
inspections of particular instances of media sport on a case-by-case 
basis (Rowe, 2004: 34).
Drawing on Rowe this thesis will be focusing mainly on climbing with 
occasional forays into kayaking and other related adventure sports such a 
hill running as examples for a socio-historical analysis of the rise of 
adventure sports in the media. Other types of adventure sport will be used 
to support the research wherever useful and possible. The reason for this 
being that there tends to be a certain overlap between the various groups 
of adventure sports enthusiasts and many might concentrate on one main 
sport, but are also occasionally active in a number of related disciplines
45
as discussed in the introduction, particularly as different seasons offer 
optimum conditions for different activities.
However, such an analysis as discussed above will only be the starting 
point for a deeper investigation of the relationship between those sports, 
society and the media, based on manifestations of power. Of central 
interest in the following chapters is therefore power at the institutional 
level. This will include how the media and climbing / kayaking have 
influenced and even changed each other. For example in its infancy (late 
19th and early 20th century) climbing as an adventure sport was very much 
dominated by the affluent British male society. The publication of 
information and reports or what could be called early media output took 
place in books and journals such as the Alpine Club journal which was 
produced by the exclusive London based Alpine Club. Although there are 
exceptions, and those will be explored in detail in the next chapters, it 
wasn’t until better transport and a change in working conditions made 
climbing available to the working classes after the 2nd World War. 
Working Class participants then formed their own clubs and hence 
produced their own media such as club journals.
Coverage of climbing in the mainstream press occurred only when British 
expeditions achieved first and spectacular ascents that fostered national 
image ascents such as the first ascent of Mount Everest or when dramatic 
events took place that made for good media coverage. Blain et al. 
highlighted the importance of sport for raising national consciousness 
among countries on an international level (1993: 37-54). Despite their 
niche / cult status extreme sports are no exception. Arguably one of the 
most well-known climbs, the Eiger North Face, has achieved somewhat 
notorious status due to fulfilling both of the criteria mentioned above. 
46
The first ascent, after numerous attempts that often ended in the death of
climbers of various nations, was finally achieved in 1938 by 
German/Austrian climbers and caused one of the first well documented 
media climbing spectacles. The ascent of the North Face was followed 
from the terrace of a conveniently situated Hotel through binoculars by 
journalists from all over the world. Hitler immediately tried to claim the 
feat for Nazi propaganda although Heinrich Harrer and his team 
rigorously denied that they had climbed the face for anything else but 
sporting endeavour. 
The Eiger North face can be used as an example of further developments 
in adventure sports, the introduction of sport as consumption. More than 
sixty years after its first ascent, the North Face has come of age in terms 
of media coverage. In 1999 a live documentary was produced that 
followed a top Swiss climbing team on their ascent of the face paid by 
sponsors and programme makers. The programme was shown on 
primetime Swiss television (SF1) and later on German and Austrian 
channels (SWR and ORF) and has been repeated several times since. This 
is a particularly interesting development that might be interpreted as an 
indicator of fundamental changes in the sport – the transformation from 
climbing as participant sport to a spectator sport. As Kay and Laberge 
state: ‘Although the anti-mainstream image of extreme sports is still 
apparent, its interdependent relationship with media and corporate agents 
has de-emphasized—or even reversed—the oppositional ideology that 
has marked its earlier motivation’ (2002: 46). 
The rise of sports stars, semi-professionalism and the lure of sponsorship 
have heavily influenced the development of those sports in the past 
decades. Now, many have proclaimed that increased media, especially 
47
TV exposure, will ultimately bring climbing into the mainstream and 
change its character forever. Hence, I will trace some of those changes 
that have taken place in the past decade. 
Apart from power at the institutional level, this work aims to analyse 
aspects of power at the relational level. This particularly refers to issues 
of gender relations. As discussed earlier, media sport is still one of the 
areas in which male hegemony reigns supreme and extreme sports are no 
exception. Women have been very active in climbing and kayaking and 
their achievements have been strong throughout the history of the sports, 
starting with the early exploits of women mountaineers in the ‘golden 
age’ of Alpine climbing (Birkett & Peascod, 1989) to modern day cutting 
edge ascents on rock and ice around the world (Blum, 1998). However, 
their exploits have often been neglected or played down. Drawing on 
Bourdieu’s concept of cultural capital (2001) and on Connell’s (1997) 
definition of masculinity in sport (amongst others) this thesis will attempt 
to analyse why there is still a tendency towards invisibility and 
marginalisation of women in such sports and a tendency to emphasise the 
maleness of the adventure hero. As MacKay and Dallaire stated in 2013:
Despite the documented emergence of counter-discourses, the 
overall results of recent studies examining (re)presentations of 
sportswomen in both mainstream and alternative media confirm the 
persisting asymmetrical coverage of women and men that 
ultimately contributes to gender inequity in sport. (MacKay & 
Dallaire, 2012:3)
Finally, another area of importance is the interface between the media 
texts, producers and the audiences. For adventure sports different types of 
media have a different status and play different roles in terms of political 
economy and consumption of sport to what they would in mainstream 
48
sports. Hence it will not be sufficient to concentrate on the analysis of 
one particular strand of media, but it is important to include a variety of 
sources for a more comprehensive analysis, such as specialist magazines, 
programmes and films, club level publications and discussion forums.
Many theorists have put forward the point that web-based media play an 
increasingly important role, particularly for alternative sports and have 
coined the term ‘Cybersport’ as a new source to construct and deduct 
meaning about alternative sporting communities and identities. (Kinkema 
& Harris, 1998; MacKay & Dallaire, 2012; Wheaton, 2007).
49
Chapter 3: Issues of methodology
Section 1: Methodological approach
Section 2: Research design
Section 3: Limitations
50
Chapter 3: Issues of methodology
Section 1: Methodological approach
This chapter will discuss the methods that have been used to inform the 
work in the following chapters of this thesis. The thesis is designed as an 
interdisciplinary piece of work in the tradition of a classical mediasociological approach drawing on theories from the fields of media 
studies, cultural studies, sport studies and leisure studies, and makes use 
of ethnographic methods including semi-structured and unstructured 
interviews, participant observation, document and media analysis. In
addition it will also make use of one of the more recent methods of 
nethnography (Gatson, 2013; Kozinets, 2002; Gilchrist & Ravenscroft, 
2011).
This study seeks to explore how adventure sports and in particular 
climbing has developed from its beginnings of mountain exploration in 
the 19th century into the modern multifaceted sport of the 21st century. 
Secondly, it aims to explore how commercialisation has affected the sport 
and what role the media have played in both this and the development of 
the sport. Thirdly, it seeks to understand how its participants create their 
cultural identities with a specific focus on female identity in a typically 
masculine, physical and risk-involved sport. 
It was clear from the outset that quantitative methods of research would 
provide methodological limitations as the aim was to deal with complex 
issues such as the formation of (sub)cultural groupings and gender 
identity formation alongside historical aspects of the development of the 
sport. Hence, a qualitative research methods approach was warranted 
51
which would allow for the complexities of such a topic to be explored in 
detail.
A qualitative approach also seemed more appropriate as it takes into 
account the socially constructed nature of reality, the intimate 
relationship between the researcher and what is studied, and the 
situational constraints that shape inquiry (Denzin and Lincoln, 2005: 10).
Qualitative research has been described as a:
...situated activity that locates the observer in the world. It consists 
of a set of interpretive, material practices that make the world 
visible. These practices transform the world. They turn the world 
into a series of representations, including field notes, interviews, 
conversations, photographs, recordings, and memos to the self. At 
this level, qualitative involves an interpretative, natural settings, 
attempting to make sense of, or interpret, phenomena in terms of the 
meanings people bring to them (Denzin and Lincoln, 2005: 4).
For the purposes of this research an ethnographic approach using 
participant observation also seemed to be most appropriate as it appears 
to be an especially fruitful type of approach for a research setting within a 
subcultural group (Rubin, Rubin & Thiele, 2005). As Wolcott proposed 
ethnography is here understood as not only the study of a particular 
culture, but a study of the social behaviours of an identifiable group of 
people (Wolcott, 2008). This qualitative design gives the researcher the 
opportunity to describe and interpret the shared patterns of behaviour, 
beliefs and language which are held amongst a culture-sharing group 
(Creswell, 2013). 
The loosely structured approach to data collection gives the researcher 
more freedom and flexibility. Furthermore, the emphasis on interpretation 
52
and the proximity between the researcher and the research tends to 
provide insights into the complexities of the phenomenon under research 
which quantitative research would not be able to uncover to the same 
extent and depth. Creswell summarises it well, when he suggests that the 
‘intent in ethnography is to determine how the culture works rather than 
to understand an issue or problem using the case as a specific illustration’ 
(Creswell, 2007: 73). I felt that this approach would be the most suitable 
for this particular field of research as it will help mirror the perspectives 
of the people being researched rather then those of the researcher, i.e. 
myself. As Bryman states, it is more likely to set its
…priority accorded [sic!] to the perspectives of those being studied 
rather than the prior centering of the researcher along with a related 
emphasis on the interpretation of observations in accordance with 
subjects’ own understandings (Bryman, 1989: 135).
This is particularly important regarding one of the main thrusts of the 
thesis which is to try and reveal the social reality of a subcultural group. 
An ethnographic approach appears to be especially helpful in order to see 
through the eyes of the people who are involved and thus research the 
self-perception of members of the group. Considering that vast amount of 
information and communication exchange is now taking place on the 
Internet, a ‘nethnographic approach’ or in other words ‘ethnography on 
the internet’ seemed to provide another useful way to gather data. This 
contemporary way for data-gathering has been stipulated by researchers 
such as Kozinets (2002) and Gilchrist & Ravenscroft (2011). This 
technique of gathering data includes ‘using websites to observe, record 
and participate in the public discussions of a community gathered by 
common interests and consumption activities’ (Gilchrist & Ravenscroft,
2011: 180). In combination with document analysis this will allow me to 
53
draw conclusions about how people construct their reality, but also how 
outsiders relate to this reality.
As discussed in the introduction, my extensive involvement with the 
sports and the various roles I have held within the subculture provided me 
not only with a deep knowledge of the subject area, but also with a 
privileged and unique access to the group. This added a number of 
dimensions to this research which an outsider would have found more 
difficult to achieve. One was to identify relevant interview partners, both 
amongst the wider community of adventure sports participants and the 
experts, but perhaps more importantly, there was also the opportunity to 
record more informal conversations and exchanges. This allowed me to 
‘gain a better understanding of the conceptual categories of social actors, 
their points of view (emic), the meanings of their actions and behaviour, 
and social and political processes’ (Gobo, 2011:26).
I also employed participant observation over a long period of time (from 
2003 until 2013) which added interesting data to the thesis. Whilst there 
could be an obvious conflict between researcher and participant with 
regards to subjectivity and a lack of distance, the immersed researcher 
has a number of benefits for this type of research. It allows one to 
identify questions more easily and it also makes misinterpretations of 
research materials less likely. However, it clearly also poses questions of 
potential bias so that I had to make sure that I was distanced enough from 
the material as to analyse the material in an objective way. This is one of 
the limitations more frequently cited when employing ethnography-based
methodologies.
54
Section 2: Research design
Creswell suggests that the most appropriate forms of data collection for a 
piece of ethnographic research are to use primarily observations and 
interviews, but also to collect other sources during the extended time in 
the field (Creswell, 2007: 78). Following his advice, one of the main 
sources of data collection in this research are semi-structured interviews 
with climbers both male and female. Ten female and ten male climbers 
were approached from the British climbing community. I attempted to 
sample climbers from a wide cross section of social and economic 
backgrounds, between 18-58 years of age. There is clearly a limitation 
with regards to race and ethnicity of the participants as the vast majority 
of British climbers are from a white, non ethnic-minority background as 
the BMC 2010 membership survey highlighted: 
In terms of ethnicity members tend to be predominantly White 
British (94.2%), White - Irish (0.5%) and White - Other (3.4%). 
Other black and minority ethnic groups are also apparent within the 
membership although there is less than 1% within each ethnic group. 
Those most common minority groups are Mixed White and Asian 
(0.6%), Chinese (0.4%) and Other Asian (0.2%). This is consistent 
with findings of the recent BMC equity survey. (BMC, 2010)
Indeed, there is a distinct concern about the focus of research in lifestyle 
sports on white and western experience. Wheaton, e.g. highlights the 
need for research which examines ‘participants’ racialized experience’ 
(2010:1071).
Initially I intended to also employ group interviews, but after having 
carried out two focus groups it was deemed impractical due to the nature 
of climbers. Many are very focused on their climbing and in addition to 
55
work and family life have little availability in terms of time. So, to fix a 
date that would suit a group of six or seven climbers seemed virtually 
impossible. Furthermore, some climbers are notoriously domineering 
and hence there is a danger of not taking on board everyone’s views in a 
group session. So, individual interviews were deemed to be more 
insightful and promised to provide more in-depth data.
The sample was constructed in this way in order to accumulate ‘the 
widest possible range of variation in the phenomenon, settings, or people 
under study’ (Marshall & Grossmann, 1989: 55). The ultimate aim of the 
interviews was to elicit deep thoughts, ideas and beliefs the respondents 
hold about the issues the research is concerned. I was interested in 
allowing space for the individualism of every person and I was conscious 
of not being too restrictive with the interview questions, thus I tried to 
minimise the degree to which the questions were constrained (Bryman, 
1989: 147). Nevertheless, there has to be some kind of structure to the 
interviews in order to allow comparative conclusions in the analysis. 
Hence, a question-reminder was used in all the interviews, which helped 
to ensure that all areas that were to be investigated were covered, but also 
allowed for deviation if other interesting topics or themes occurred. In 
order not to influence the interviewees, the questions were not shown to 
them. All questions were open-ended allowing the respondents to make 
statements reflecting their feelings, attitudes, opinions or aspirations.
All interviews were recorded and transcribed so that during the research 
the whole concentration could be directed at the interviewee. McCracken 
emphasised the special significance of this, because ‘some important data 
will never appear as such’ (McCracken, 1991: 40). The interviewer has 
to listen for implications and hidden meanings that will not come to the 
56
surface by themselves and must think of ways of unearthing them. 
Therefore, the researcher is only able to explore them if she manages to 
index these by the presence of other terms, interpretations of meaning and 
behaviour during the interview. Hence, careful observation of the 
interviewee is absolutely crucial (ibid.). Each interview lasted around an 
hour and was conducted in a variety of social settings including climbing 
walls, in climbers’ houses or in cafes, pubs or similar.
In addition to climber’s interviews, further detailed interviews were 
carried out with experts in the field to provide a deeper understanding of 
key areas. They were purposefully selected to cover specific aspects of 
the adventure sports community requiring in-depth analysis including
policy-making, traditional media and new media. A full list can be found 
in Appendices 1 and 2.
The second main source of data for this piece of work was traditional 
desk research. This involved the gathering, review and analysis of 
documents and materials covering the history, policy and structural 
developments of the sport. As Marshall & Rossmann point out, ‘the 
review of documents is an unobtrusive method, rich in portraying the 
values and beliefs of participants in the setting’ (1999: 116).
I gathered and analysed in detail club journals of some of the most 
important historical clubs such as the Alpine Club and the Scottish 
Mountaineering Club, policy booklets of the governing bodies such as the 
British Mountaineering Council, the Mountaineering Council of Scotland,
the British Canoe Union and the Scottish Canoe Association and 
documents of the professional bodies overseeing qualifications along 
with minor publications and pamphlets. Additionally, guidebooks, biographies and autobiographies and other literature from an ever 
growing body of writing on the subject was collated in order to provide a 
context and added dimension in addition to the more scholarly 
sociological texts. These were mainly used to inform the next chapter 
(Chapter 4 – A socio-economic history of climbing and also Chapter 6 –
The media environment). Finally a considerable volume of climbing and 
kayaking magazines from across the decades and different publishers was 
reviewed to obtain further contextual overview. I was very aware of the 
need to strike a balance between the different materials, bearing in mind 
that direct quotes from interviewees should be preferred over journalistic 
generalizations or autobiographical sources.
The third significant method of research was participant observation. This
included observations of climbers at the climbing wall during training 
and competitions, during visits to crags and mountains to climb, during 
sporting events such as mountain marathons, and during formal and 
informal social events. The technique of gathering information through 
observation was chosen in order to learn more ‘about behaviours and the 
meanings attached to those behaviours’ with the assumption that 
behaviour is purposive and expressive of deeper values and beliefs’ 
(Marshall & Rossman, 1989: 79). This method of observation (employed 
between 2003 and 2013) was used to stand side by side with the 
interviews to augment and evaluate the statements made by the 
interviewees. 
For this purpose, I carried a notebook and whenever possible made field 
note comments. For obvious reasons this was not always practical during 
a climb, but I would try to write down observations and comments as 
soon as possible. If my memory was not very clear anymore at the stage 
58
of writing it down, I would omit the observation. Although it was 
generally known that I am doing research in this field, the boundaries of 
seeking permission for particular quotes or observations was much wider 
then in personal interviews and permission could not always be sought, 
hence no names or identifying descriptors will be used for any persons 
who have been mentioned in the field notes. A diary has a useful purpose 
in the complex process of gathering data in an ethnographic context. It 
offers a detour via detachment (Elias, 1987; Atkinson, 2014) during the 
research process and can help achieve a level of reflexive control over the 
research process which could other wise not have been achieved.
The final method used in this thesis is what has been described as 
nethnography (Kozinets, 2002; Gilchrist & Ravenscroft, 2011). In the last 
decade the Internet has received more attention as a research tool. 
Nethnography has been described as adding a useful dimension to 
contemporary qualitative research and has been show to be particularly 
useful for studying adventure sports communities where increasingly 
public discourse is being transferred to the web (see e.g. Gilchrist & 
Ravenscroft). However, it also raises ethical issues such as questions of 
informed consent, privacy and copyright (Lawson, 2004).
These research methods were employed bearing in mind Denzin’s (1970) 
concept of methodological triangulation. He stated that ‘sociology’s 
empirical reality is a reality of competing definitions, attitudes and 
personal values’ and thus multiple methods and theoretical approaches 
must be used in order to reveal reality.
The main focus of this research is on climbing as an adventure sport, but 
it was deemed to be informative and useful to make occasional forays in 
59
to kayaking and other adventure sports as there are frequent
idiosyncrasies amongst the sports discussed. From personal experience, 
most outdoor enthusiasts might have a focus on one particular sport, but 
have additional activities into which they might move or dip, depending 
on circumstances such as stages in life, weather or seasonal activity. A 
great fluency and interaction between those sports and their participants 
can be observed as discussed in the introduction. Another reason for this 
is also the British weather. For adventure sports enthusiasts to only have 
one activity they enjoy is likely to lead to frustration. Climbing is mainly 
carried out when it is either dry or snowy and icy whereas kayaking relies 
on sufficient (rain) water, hence the two sports perfectly complement
each other. Equally, hill-walking and hill-running (such as Mountain 
Marathon running) are activities which are often considered
complementary to climbing depending on time of year and other 
commitments such as family and work. 
Section 3: Limitations
As discussed above there are both general strengths and weaknesses in 
the methods and analysis of a qualitative piece of research such as this 
one. As far as adventure studies are concerned, the application of 
ethnographic-type research has been extremely enlightening and has 
produced a vast amount of informative and in-depth research in the field 
(see e.g. Wheaton, 2000b and Thorpe, 2005). However, there are a 
number of particular limitations that have to be borne in mind, the most 
important one perhaps being the position of the involved researcher. 
Research where ‘the researcher-author describes a cultural setting to 
which s/he has a natural access, is an active participant, more or less on 
60
equal terms with other participants’ (Alvesson, 2003) could be criticised 
for a lack of objectivity. However, it also adds value and depth as it 
allows for a more holistic view of the subculture using both views and 
experiences of the participants and the researcher.
In addition, there is also the question of the number of interviewees. 
Whilst this research has tried to select a sufficient number of research 
subjects, a greater number, spread over a greater area (e.g. Europe rather 
then the UK) and different disciplines might bring some further, 
enlightening results.
Many theorists employing qualitative methodologies support the notion 
that any analysis taking place within ethnographic research is only 
meaningful and indeed valid if context is being considered and links to 
social, political and economical parameters are being drawn (Marshall & 
Rossmann, 1999; Denzin & Lincoln, 2011; Mason, 2002). Creswell even 
warns of a potential problem of the researcher going ‘native’ and being 
unable to complete the project (Creswell, 2007: 72). Whilst this 
suggestion sounds rather extreme, it is easy to see that ethnography bears 
its own potential pitfalls such as a lack of subjectivity and distance. Both 
of these limitations might be addressed through triangulation, i.e. using a 
number of types of data collection methods for the researchbiographies and autobiographies and other literature from an ever 
growing body of writing on the subject was collated in order to provide a 
context and added dimension in addition to the more scholarly 
sociological texts. These were mainly used to inform the next chapter 
(Chapter 4 – A socio-economic history of climbing and also Chapter 6 –
The media environment). Finally a considerable volume of climbing and 
kayaking magazines from across the decades and different publishers was 
reviewed to obtain further contextual overview. I was very aware of the 
need to strike a balance between the different materials, bearing in mind 
that direct quotes from interviewees should be preferred over journalistic 
generalizations or autobiographical sources.
The third significant method of research was participant observation. This
included observations of climbers at the climbing wall during training 
and competitions, during visits to crags and mountains to climb, during 
sporting events such as mountain marathons, and during formal and 
informal social events. The technique of gathering information through 
observation was chosen in order to learn more ‘about behaviours and the 
meanings attached to those behaviours’ with the assumption that 
behaviour is purposive and expressive of deeper values and beliefs’ 
(Marshall & Rossman, 1989: 79). This method of observation (employed 
between 2003 and 2013) was used to stand side by side with the 
interviews to augment and evaluate the statements made by the 
interviewees. 
For this purpose, I carried a notebook and whenever possible made field 
note comments. For obvious reasons this was not always practical during 
a climb, but I would try to write down observations and comments as 
soon as possible. If my memory was not very clear anymore at the stage 
58
of writing it down, I would omit the observation. Although it was 
generally known that I am doing research in this field, the boundaries of 
seeking permission for particular quotes or observations was much wider 
then in personal interviews and permission could not always be sought, 
hence no names or identifying descriptors will be used for any persons 
who have been mentioned in the field notes. A diary has a useful purpose 
in the complex process of gathering data in an ethnographic context. It 
offers a detour via detachment (Elias, 1987; Atkinson, 2014) during the 
research process and can help achieve a level of reflexive control over the 
research process which could other wise not have been achieved.
The final method used in this thesis is what has been described as 
nethnography (Kozinets, 2002; Gilchrist & Ravenscroft, 2011). In the last 
decade the Internet has received more attention as a research tool. 
Nethnography has been described as adding a useful dimension to 
contemporary qualitative research and has been show to be particularly 
useful for studying adventure sports communities where increasingly 
public discourse is being transferred to the web (see e.g. Gilchrist & 
Ravenscroft). However, it also raises ethical issues such as questions of 
informed consent, privacy and copyright (Lawson, 2004).
These research methods were employed bearing in mind Denzin’s (1970) 
concept of methodological triangulation. He stated that ‘sociology’s 
empirical reality is a reality of competing definitions, attitudes and 
personal values’ and thus multiple methods and theoretical approaches 
must be used in order to reveal reality.
The main focus of this research is on climbing as an adventure sport, but 
it was deemed to be informative and useful to make occasional forays in 
59
to kayaking and other adventure sports as there are frequent
idiosyncrasies amongst the sports discussed. From personal experience, 
most outdoor enthusiasts might have a focus on one particular sport, but 
have additional activities into which they might move or dip, depending 
on circumstances such as stages in life, weather or seasonal activity. A 
great fluency and interaction between those sports and their participants 
can be observed as discussed in the introduction. Another reason for this 
is also the British weather. For adventure sports enthusiasts to only have 
one activity they enjoy is likely to lead to frustration. Climbing is mainly 
carried out when it is either dry or snowy and icy whereas kayaking relies 
on sufficient (rain) water, hence the two sports perfectly complement
each other. Equally, hill-walking and hill-running (such as Mountain 
Marathon running) are activities which are often considered
complementary to climbing depending on time of year and other 
commitments such as family and work. 
Section 3: Limitations
As discussed above there are both general strengths and weaknesses in 
the methods and analysis of a qualitative piece of research such as this 
one. As far as adventure studies are concerned, the application of 
ethnographic-type research has been extremely enlightening and has 
produced a vast amount of informative and in-depth research in the field 
(see e.g. Wheaton, 2000b and Thorpe, 2005). However, there are a 
number of particular limitations that have to be borne in mind, the most 
important one perhaps being the position of the involved researcher. 
Research where ‘the researcher-author describes a cultural setting to 
which s/he has a natural access, is an active participant, more or less on 
60
equal terms with other participants’ (Alvesson, 2003) could be criticised 
for a lack of objectivity. However, it also adds value and depth as it 
allows for a more holistic view of the subculture using both views and 
experiences of the participants and the researcher.
In addition, there is also the question of the number of interviewees. 
Whilst this research has tried to select a sufficient number of research 
subjects, a greater number, spread over a greater area (e.g. Europe rather 
then the UK) and different disciplines might bring some further, 
enlightening results.
Many theorists employing qualitative methodologies support the notion 
that any analysis taking place within ethnographic research is only 
meaningful and indeed valid if context is being considered and links to 
social, political and economical parameters are being drawn (Marshall & 
Rossmann, 1999; Denzin & Lincoln, 2011; Mason, 2002). Creswell even 
warns of a potential problem of the researcher going ‘native’ and being 
unable to complete the project (Creswell, 2007: 72). Whilst this 
suggestion sounds rather extreme, it is easy to see that ethnography bears 
its own potential pitfalls such as a lack of subjectivity and distance. Both 
of these limitations might be addressed through triangulation, i.e. using a 
number of types of data collection methods for the research