Abstract
Objectives
Flow states may explain motivation for continued participation in adventure recreation (e.g., skydiving, kayaking). This review aimed to identify what is known about flow states that occur during adventure recreation.

Design
Systematic review following PRISMA guidelines.

Method
A systematic search of 10 databases (e.g., SPORTdiscus, PsychINFO) yielded 93 potentially relevant articles out of 9468 screened titles and abstracts. The thematic synthesis approach was used to appraise and synthesise 20 empirical articles, which fulfilled a priori eligibility criteria.

Results
The findings from this review are based on insights gathered from 1179 adventure recreation participants. Participants were rock-climbers, surfers, mountaineers, kayakers, skydivers, ski jumpers, and adventure racers. The synthesis resulted in four analytical themes: antecedents and inhibitors of flow, characteristics of flow, consequences of flow, and conceptual differences. Adventure recreation may provide opportunities to experience flow in a unique context. For example, this review found that flow experiences can be influenced through immersion in nature and a desire to control and reduce risk.

Conclusions
A central finding of this review of research that spanned from 1975 to 2019 is that flow, in the context of adventure recreation, is currently more descriptive than explanatory. Furthermore, evidence for flow in adventure recreation relies extensively on correlational and qualitative designs. Recommendations for future research include making use of quasi-experimental designs and emerging technologies for measuring psychophysiological indicators of flow.

Introduction
Early explanations for participation in adventure recreation (e.g., skydiving, rock-climbing, kayaking) relied heavily on psychoanalytic theory (e.g., Deutsch, 1926). In the 1980s, research on sensation-seeking and other personality traits emerged (e.g., Zuckerman, 1983) and investigations of personality traits are ongoing (e.g., Monasterio & Robert Cloninger, 2019). Through a series of meta-analyses, McEwan, Boudreau, Curran, and Rhodes (2019) found certain personality traits (e.g., sensation-seeking and extraversion) correlated at a medium to large effect size with adventure recreation participation. However, personality trait models have only explained a limited amount of the variance in participation (McEwan et al., 2019), and have not fully explained prolonged participation in adventure recreation (Celsi, Rose, & Leigh, 1993). In addition, research on personality traits such as sensation-seeking have significant shortcomings. For example, the Sensation-Seeking Scale (Zuckerman, 1983) includes items that are tautological for the adventure recreation context (e.g., “I would like to try parachute jumping”). Overall, the mechanisms underpinning adventure recreation experiences require further investigation.

While earlier research focused on psychological deviance associated with people who take part in adventure recreation (e.g., death wishes, Icarus complexes; Hoover, 1978), several researchers have found positive benefits associated with participation. For example, adventure recreation may prevent problem behaviour and criminality among adolescents (Hansen & Breivik, 2001); trigger courage and humility (Brymer & Oades, 2009); increase self-esteem (Woodman et al., 2019); and promote active and healthy lifestyles (Eigenschenk et al., 2019). Researchers have even advocated the use of adventure recreation as a mainstream intervention for positive mental health (Clough, Houge Mackenzie, Mallabon, & Brymer, 2016). Given the established benefits that these activities confer and the growing popularity of adventure recreation (The Outdoor Foundation, 2018), there is a need to better understand factors associated with participation.

In addition to psychoanalytic and personality trait model explanations of participation in adventure recreation, a wide range of motivations (e.g., opportunities for mastery, overcoming fear, socialising, identity construction, connecting with nature) have been empirically identified to explain participation (Celsi et al., 1993; Kerr & Houge Mackenzie, 2012; Pomfret & Bramwell, 2014). Furthermore, researchers have proposed that experiencing a flow state (i.e., an effortless and enjoyable state of feeling deeply in control and fully immersed in an activity; Swann, Piggott, Schweickle, & Vella, 2018) may provide a strong motivation for continued participation in adventure recreation (Delle Fave, Bassi, & Massimini, 2003; Morgan & Coutts, 2016). Flow has been studied in adventure recreation contexts since its conception (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975), when rock-climbers were interviewed during preliminary flow research, and more recently among mountaineers and surfers (Delle Fave et al., 2003; Morgan & Coutts, 2016). Flow has been found to be the most important source of rock-climbers’ enjoyment (Motl, 1996) and a particularly important motive for surfers (Nerothin, 2017). This paper extends the understanding of adventure recreation motivations and experiences by reviewing what is known about flow states in the context of adventure recreation.

The terms extreme, action, high-risk, alternative, or lifestyle sports have often been used interchangeably to describe adventure recreation across bodies of literature, including: medical and legal (e.g., Pain & Kerr, 2004), marketing (e.g., Shoham, Rose, & Kahle, 1993), and psychological (Clough et al., 2016). In this review, adventure recreation is defined as self-initiated nature-based physical activities that generate heightened bodily sensations (e.g., vestibular sensations arising from quick acceleration in varying dimensions of space) and require skill development to manage unique perceived and objective risks. Note that this definition highlights bodily sensations arising from adventure recreation as heightened and distinguishes them from bodily sensations experienced in everyday life. Similarly, the perceived and objective risks encountered in adventure recreation are described as unique, rather than inherently higher, compared to the risks encountered in everyday experiences (e.g., driving a car). Adventure recreation includes activities such as: rock-climbing, skydiving, and white-water kayaking (Woodman et al., 2019).

Despite the emergence of ‘indoorised’ adventure recreation (van Bottenburg & Salome, 2010), such as indoor rock-climbing or wind tunnel skydiving, we argue that these activities are conceptually different from our notion of adventure recreation. Specifically, the predictability of controlled environments entails reduced risks in ‘indoorised’ adventure (Woolings, McKay, & Emery, 2015). Furthermore, it has been proposed that nature plays a critical role in adventure recreation and its absence may lead to distinct motivations, experiences, and outcomes (Houge Mackenzie & Hodge, 2019). Similarly, guided adventure recreation (e.g., commercial rafting or bungee jumping) does not conceptually fit within our definition of adventure recreation due to the decreased levels of personal skill development required and a reduction in self-initiated risk management.

Flow has been extensively reviewed in the context of elite sport (Stamatelopoulou, Pezirkianidis, Karakasidou, Lakioti, & Stalikas, 2018; Swann et al., 2012), traditional sport (Carter, River, & Sachs, 2013), and exercise (Jackman, Hawkins, Crust, & Swann, 2019). Overall, flow research in sport and exercise psychology has predominantly relied on an uncontested model of flow (for more information on this issue see: Swann, Crust, & Vella, 2017). This model was developed by Jackson (1996) and expanded the original six dimensions of flow identified by Csikszentmihalyi (1975). Specifically, based on investigations with a variety of elite athletes, Jackson and Marsh (1996) integrated the following nine key dimensions of flow in the first Flow State Scale (FSS):
1)
A challenges/skill balance. Flow may occur when perceived challenges are balanced with perceived skills.

2)
Merging of action and awareness. During flow, a feeling of oneness with the activity and awareness occurs.

3)
Clear goals. For flow to occur, the intent of an action (i.e., goal) should be clearly outlined.

4)
Unambiguous feedback. Flow occurs along with moment by moment feedback of one’s actions.

5)
Total concentration on the task at hand. During flow, individuals are fully concentrated on the activity at hand.

6)
Sense of control. A perceived sense of being in control usually occurs during flow.

7)
Loss of self-consciousness. Thoughts about oneself are absent during flow.

8)
Transcendence of time. During flow, one’s sense of time may be altered. For example, time can be perceived as slowing down or speeding up.

9)
Autotelic experience. When in flow, an individual finds the activity enjoyable and rewarding.


However, based on evidence of an overlapping, yet distinct optimal state (i.e., clutch), Swann, Crust, and Vella (2017) have argued for avenues of further research and modifications of this flow model. In turn, Swann, Crust, and Vella (2017) have questioned the discriminant validity of the most commonly used flow measures (e.g., FSS-2; Jackson & Eklund, 2004). Given these recent critiques of long-standing flow conceptualisations in the sport and exercise context, this review will extend this work by critically analysing what is known about flow states in the adventure recreation context.

To date, there have been no systematic reviews of flow state research in adventure recreation contexts. Therefore, this review will complement reviews conducted on flow states in the traditional sport (e.g., volleyball, soccer; Swann et al., 2012) and exercise (e.g., treadmill running, aerobic dance classes; Jackman et al., 2019) contexts. Reviewing the current state of research on flow in adventure recreation may clarify the role of flow in this unique context. Consequently, the main research question that this review addressed was: What is known about flow states that occur during adventure recreation? In order to answer this question systematically, the following sub research questions were created:
(i)
How have studies defined flow states in adventure recreation?

(ii)
What are the antecedents and consequences of flow states within adventure recreation?

(iii)
What flow interventions have been conducted within adventure recreation contexts?

(iv)
What methodologies have been used to evaluate flow within adventure recreation?


This systematic review was conducted to not only summarise and critically interpret individual studies on flow in adventure recreation, but also to identify gaps in the literature and assess what additional primary research is needed, if any (Major & Savin-Baden, 2010). To synthesise research from a variety of methodologies, an integrated design was used for this review. This design assumed that a diversity of methodologies could be harmoniously combined to answer questions on a particular topic (Sandelowski, Voils, & Barroso, 2006). The review was registered with PROSPERO (CRD42018115526) and followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines (Moher et al., 2009; see Appendix A).

The search strategy was piloted in September and October 2018 by the first author and reviewed by all co-authors. The keywords were adapted from the search strategies of previous reviews on flow (Stamatelopoulou et al., 2018; Swann et al., 2012) and adventure recreation (e.g., McEwan et al., 2019). The final search strategy was composed of three strings of keywords, combined with appropriate Boolean operators (see Appendix B). The first of these strings included synonyms for “adventure recreation” that had been used by researchers across diverse fields of study (e.g., “extreme sport*” OR “adventure sport*“). The second string of keywords was related to specific adventure recreation activities described in academic articles found in the pilot search (e.g., mountaineer* OR skydive*). The first and second strings were combined with the third string of keywords describing optimal states (e.g., “flow state*” OR “peak experience*“).

Prior to the formal search for primary articles, the first author searched three databases of reviews to ensure the originality of this review (i.e., PROSPERO, COCHRANE, Campbell Collaborative). Five databases were searched systematically for relevant articles in December 2018 (i.e., SPORTDiscus, PsycINFO, Web of Science, PubMed, ProQuest Central). These databases were selected based on (i) their relevance to sport psychology and (ii) their use in the most-cited systematic review of flow in sport contexts (i.e., Swann et al., 2012). Considering the non-exhaustive nature of databases (Tod & Eubank, 2017), additional strategies for locating articles were employed. Based on the suggestions outlined in the Cochran Handbook for Systematic Reviews (Higgins & Green, 2011), five additional databases for grey literature were searched (i.e., MEDLINE-in-Process, Open Grey, ProQuest Dissertations & Theses, ProQuest Conference Papers Index, PsychEXTRA). Backward searches were conducted by examining the reference list of included articles for additional relevant literature. Forward searches of included articles were conducted via Google Scholar (Haddaway, Collins, Coughlin, & Kirk, 2015). Finally, the first author personally contacted 34 recognised adventure and flow researchers and all authors of included articles to request any unpublished research that might be relevant to the review.

The screening and inclusion process (i.e., the quantity of articles identified, retrieved, included and excluded, and the reasons for exclusions) is documented in Fig. 1. The list below details the criteria for article eligibility:
(i)
Articles were included if they reported empirical studies from any field of research examining flow in the context of adventure recreation.

(ii)
Articles were included if they explicitly referred to flow in the methodology or results section. This criterion was used to improve the comprehensiveness of the review and to ensure the review’s findings were based on direct examinations of flow (c.f., Hetland et al., [2018] was excluded because it referred to flow in the discussion without having explicitly gathered empirical data on flow).

(iii)
Articles were excluded if they only mentioned a component of flow (e.g., loss of self-consciousness), but not flow.

(iv)
To maintain a minimum quality standard (Cheng, Edwards, Darcy, & Redfern, 2018), articles were excluded if they were not published in a peer-reviewed journal. Nevertheless, the systematic search process included unpublished research to increase the probability of uncovering all published records via forward and backward searches of the reference lists of unpublished studies. A list of excluded articles (see Appendix C) provides the opportunity for flow researchers to consult unpublished, yet potentially relevant, additional research.

(v)
Studies written in any language were considered for inclusion because “the inclusion of studies published in languages other than English could avoid bias” and may contribute valuable additional information (Jüni, Holenstein, Sterne, Bartletta, & Eggera, 2002, p. 118, p. 118)

(vi)
Any conceptual papers or reviews found through the systematic search were excluded from this review, but were used to identify additional eligible articles. Non-research articles (e.g., commentaries) or research articles describing activities that did not correspond with the definition of adventure recreation outlined in the introduction were excluded from this review.


To assess articles for eligibility, first, the titles and abstracts of all articles identified through the systematic search were screened by the first author to assess whether or not the topics were relevant to the review (e.g., topics related to hydraulic flow were excluded). Second, the abstracts of articles that had not been excluded were read by the first and second author, and assessed based on eligibility criteria. The reasons for excluding an article at this stage were noted and outlined in the flowchart (see Figure 1). Based on recommendations to strive for ‘overinclusiveness’ (Williams & Shaw, 2016), any disagreement among authors at this stage of the selection process led to the inclusion of an article for review in the third stage. In the third stage, the full text of included articles were retrieved and read by the first and second authors, who assessed all articles against the eligibility criteria. This third stage entailed ensuring that flow was present in the methodology or findings/results section of articles. If disagreements occurred at this third stage, a discussion took place among all three authors. The reasoning for exclusion of any debated articles is reported in Appendix D. The detailed reporting of discussions between authors was chosen over inter-rater reliability calculations due to potential ethical and practical issues inherent with inter-rater reliability (e.g., power hierarchies among authors; Smith & McGannon, 2018). The search process was finalised in March 2019 and initially returned 9468 potentially relevant studies (see Figure 1). After screening the titles and abstracts, 93 articles were assessed for eligibility based on full-texts by all authors. Articles were excluded if they were not peer-reviewed, were unrelated to flow, lacked empirical data, or contained duplicate analyses of articles already included. Despite the eligibility of non-English articles, on the basis of relevant content, only English articles were included in this review. Overall, 20 articles were included in the thematic synthesis. The quantity of articles found was similar to previous reviews of flow in sport (i.e., Stamatelopoulou et al., 2018; Swann et al., 2012), which both yielded 17 articles, and exercise (i.e., Jackman et al., 2019), which yielded 25 articles.

Data were synthesised using the thematic synthesis approach proposed by Thomas and Harden (2008). Thematic synthesis extends Braun and Clark’s (2006) process of thematic analysis, which is commonly used to analyse data from primary qualitative research, to the process of analysis necessary for a systematic review (Thomas & Harden, 2008). Specifically, the thematic synthesis was conducted according to the following steps:
(i)
Each included article was read several times by the first author;

(ii)
Definitions of flow utilised by researchers, sample characteristics, sampling methods, non-response rates, study designs, analysis methods, instruments used, and durations of data collection was extracted and summarised (see Table 1);

(iii)
The quality of each article was assessed by all three authors using the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool (MMAT; Hong et al., 2018);

(iv)
Data from the results sections of articles were inductively coded line-by-line using thematic analysis processes (Braun & Clarke, 2006) and data management software NVivo. Quantitative data were assigned a qualitative code at this step (i.e., data were ‘qualitised’; Pope et al., 2007). ‘Qualitising’ does not appear to have been used previously in the field of sport and exercise psychology and stems primarily from nursing and medical literature (e.g., Dreyer, Köhler, Hochgraeber, Holle, & von Kutzleben, 2018; Pope et al., 2007). The process of ‘qualitising’ allowed for quantitative data (e.g., correlational matrix) to be narratively described and compared alongside qualitative themes. The ‘qualitising’ approach was used in order to provide a more fluid integration of quantitative, qualitative, and mixed method research. For example, the qualitative code “well-being” was created from the finding that flow correlated significantly to well-being;

(v)
Data codes were organised into high-order ‘descriptive themes’, which is similar to what meta-ethnographers call ‘translation’ (Noblit & Hare, 1988);

(vi)
Themes arrived at inductively were then compared and contrasted in relation to the research questions in order to establish overarching ‘analytical themes’;

(vii)
A ‘sensitivity analysis’ (Thomas & Harden, 2008) was conducted to verify, in relation to the MMAT appraisals, the relative impact of each study on the overall findings of the synthesis (see Appendix D & E). Specifically, the quality and limitations of primary articles, for which codes emanated from only one primary article, is discussed in the ‘sensitivity analysis’ section of the findings.


The rigour of this review was enhanced by the use of ‘critical friends’ (Smith & McGannon, 2018) during the systematic search and synthesis processes. It is important to acknowledge that different researchers may have generated a different interpretation of the synthesis. For this reason, an audit trail, as described by Weed (2006), was conducted to promote transparency in regards to the discussions held between authors about article exclusion and methodological decisions (see Appendix G). The purpose of the audit trail was to document the systematic and critical process that underpinned methodological decisions.

The first part of the findings section summarises the sample characteristics and methods reported in primary articles that investigated flow in adventure recreation contexts. The second part, “data synthesis”, explains the analytical and descriptive themes and synthesises the results of the 20 primary articles. The final part of this section reports the results of the sensitivity analysis.

Definitions of adventure recreation. In terms of how primary articles described adventure recreation, terminology varied widely across studies. The words adventure (k = 5), leisure (k = 4), risk (k = 3), extreme (k = 2), fringe (k = 1), outdoor (k = 1), and water (k = 1) were used to label the type of sport (k = 11), activity (k = 2), pursuit (k = 2), recreation (k = 1), exercise (k = 1) or setting (k = 1). The term adventure recreation used in this review encompassed all of these terms.

Study designs. An array of designs were used to explore flow in the context of adventure recreation. Nine articles were qualitative, nine were quantitative, and two articles had a mixed-method design. The design of quantitative studies were cross-sectional (k2 = 7) or longitudinal (k = 2). One mixed-method study implemented a sequential exploratory design and the other mixed-method study used a cross-sectional design. No articles described an intervention or quasi-experiment research design. The duration of data collection was longer than six months for some of the articles (k = 4); however, half of the articles (k = 10) collected information at a single time point, and the remaining articles collected data for less than a month. The most common data collection methods were interviews (k = 11), questionnaires (k = 5), the experience sampling method (k = 4), and observations (k = 4).

Sample characteristics. Authors of primary articles utilised purposive (k = 9), convenience (k = 8), snowballing (k = 2), and random (k = 1) sampling strategies. Thirteen articles reported non-response rates under 18%, while six articles did not provide non-response rates, and one article reported a non-response rate of 44%. Collectively, a total of 1,179 participants were surveyed and/or interviewed in the primary articles. Over 82%3 of participants were male and samples were, aside from Taiwan (k = 2), predominantly from Western countries (North American, Australian, European; k = 18). Participants were rock-climbers (k = 7), surfers (k = 5), mountaineers (k = 3), kayakers (k = 3), skydivers (k = 2), ski jumpers (k = 1), adventure racers (k = 1), or represented a combination of adventure recreation participants. The articles described samples as novices (k = 3), experts (k = 4) or, most commonly, a combination of novice and experts (k = 13). Only three articles sampled competitive forms of adventure recreation. The competitive samples were comprised of: surfers, adventure racers (which included activities such as rock-climbing, mountain-biking, and rappelling), and ski-jumpers.

Questionnaires. Six different types of instruments were used to explicitly measure flow: author-designed instruments (k = 4); the Flow State Scale (k = 2; Jackson & Marsh, 1996), the Short Flow State Scale (k = 1; Jackson & Eklund, 2004), the Dispositional Flow Scale (k = 1; Jackson & Eklund, 2004), the Flow Short Scale (k = 1; Engeser & Rheinberg, 2008), and the Flow Questionnaire (k = 1; Voelkl & Ellis, 1998).

Definitions of flow. The definition of flow varied considerably among the primary articles. An inductive thematic analysis of the individual elements of each definition revealed 16 discrete aspects that were used to define flow (see Appendix G for a conceptual map). Unsurprisingly, the well-recognised nine characteristics of flow outlined by Csikszentmihalyi (1990) and supported by the nine dimensions of the FSS questionnaire (Jackson & Marsh, 1996) were integral to the definition of flow in several articles. The nine themes analogous to the dimensions of the FSS were: “challenge-skill balance” (k = 11), “intrinsic motivation and autotelic experience” (k = 7), “clear goals” (k = 5), “concentration” (k = 6), “merging of action and awareness” (k = 4), “feedback” (k = 4), “perceived control” (k = 4), “lack of self-awareness” (k = 4), and “time” (k = 2).

Five additional themes were not explicitly analogous to an FSS dimension, yet were conceptually linked to one or more FSS dimension. This included the most recurrent theme of “total involvement” (k = 13), which was conceptually related to “merging of action and awareness” and “total concentration”. In addition, we identified the themes of “everything coming together” (k = 2) and “effortlessness” (k = 1) as conceptually linked to the FSS dimension of “concentration”. We also identified the theme “optimal state that lies between anxiety and boredom” (k = 2) as a conceptual equivalent to the FSS dimension “challenge-skill balance”. An additional theme that emerged, which linked to the “autotelic experience” dimension of the FSS, was “enjoyment” (k = 7). Interestingly, two themes did not overlap with any of the FSS dimensions. These were “optimal functioning” (k = 1; Schüler & Nakamura, 2013) and “transcendental experiences” (k = 2; Csikszentmihalyi, 1975; Hardie-Bick & Scott, in press).

The analytical themes (antecedents and inhibitors, flow characteristics, consequences, and conceptual differences) provide a synthesis of what is known about flow states in the adventure recreation context. These four analytical themes were developed based on 17 descriptive themes and 45 codes (see Fig. 2, Fig. 3).

Antecedents and inhibitors. The analytical theme antecedents and inhibitors encompassed precursors of flow, which may conceptually be perceived as preceding the experience of flow (e.g., challenge), as well as inhibiting variables, which may prevent flow from occurring (e.g., self-awareness). This analytical theme incorporated the descriptive themes: “challenge”, “context”, “goals”, “exploration”, “confidence”, and “inhibitors”.

The descriptive theme of “challenge” incorporated both the code ‘challenge-skill balance’ and ‘challenge’. Challenge itself was found to be a key antecedent of flow regardless of participants’ skill level. For example, Jones, Hollenhorst, Perna, and Selin (2000) found that, during the most challenging rapids, kayakers experienced flow 41.4% of the time compared to anxiety (39.9%), apathy (10.7%), or boredom (10.6%). Although ‘challenge-skill balance’ was the most recurrent code (k = 12), the relationship between this code and flow was inconsistent. Tsaur et al. (2013) found that challenge-skill balance correlated with overall flow measures (β = 0.44; p = .001). However, in a study of rock-climbers, perceived challenge-skill balance did not significantly correlate with self-reported measures of flow (r = 0.25; p = .051; Schüler & Nakamura, 2013).

The descriptive theme of “context” incorporated the codes, ‘risk reduction’, ‘immersion in nature’, and ‘experience level’. Overall, adventure recreation participants emphasised the importance of safety and a desire to reduce risks (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975; Hardie-Bick & Scott, in press). Flow was found to correlate with average levels of perceived risk, whereas above average levels of perceived risk were associated with 54.5% of high-altitude rock-climbers’ anxiety states (Delle Fave et al., 2003). Interestingly, experience levels appeared unrelated to flow as expert adventure recreation participants did not report significantly higher levels of flow compared to novices (r = 0.14, p = .29; Schüler & Nakamura, 2013). Perhaps unique to the adventure recreation context, immersion in nature was reported to facilitate flow for some participants. For example, attractive scenery and experiencing nature through several senses were reported to reduce anxiety levels (Houge Mackenzie et al., 2011) and increase absorption in the activity (Mykletun & Mazza, 2016; Partington et al., 2009). In addition, even horrific weather was reported by a mountaineer to facilitate flow because it helped them avoid stressful thoughts about falling (Swann, Crust, Jackman, et al., 2017). Finally, articles that included competitive, as opposed to non-competitive, contexts provided the only evidence for the themes of accomplishment, addictive aspects of flow, decelerated perception of time, euphoria, and fulfilment.

The descriptive theme “goals” was comprised of two types of goals: open (i.e., exploring how well one can perform) and fixed (i.e., specific, measurable, objective outcomes). For instance, Bassi and Delle Fave (2010) found that 58.9% of mountaineers reported flow states following the establishment of a goal. These a priori-set goals, although not explicitly stated as such by Bassi and Delle Fave, were conceptually aligned with ‘fixed goals’ as described by Swann, Crust, Jackman, et al. (2017). In addition to goals set a priori, some participants reported setting goals during an activity. For example, some rock-climbers were singularly focused on staying on the rock during their climb (Houge Mackenzie et al., 2011) and one rock-climber set the following open goal, “I’ll just see how it goes and take it as it comes” (Swann, Crust, Jackman, et al., 2017, p. 387). Both open and fixed goals were monitored via unambiguous feedback during the activity (Tsaur et al. 2013). This feedback was often a combination of proprioceptive and environmental feedback (Hardie-Bick & Bonner, 2016; Houge Mackenzie et al., 2011). Goals were consequently reported by participants to be achieved based on the feedback received.

The descriptive theme “exploration” as an antecedent of flow was exclusively interpreted from qualitative articles. An element of exploration entailed uncertainty about the outcome. For example, skydivers, mountaineers, and adventure racers commented on the importance of exploring, and experiencing novel situations and skills in order to facilitate flow (Hardie-Bick & Bonner, 2016; Mykletun & Mazza, 2016; Swann et al., 2019). Exploration consisted of discovering new natural environments as well as attempting new movements or skills. Inherent in both types of exploration was the role of uncertainty, which one climber explicitly described as a precursor of flow (Swann, Crust, Jackman, et al., 2017). Similarly, Hardie-Bick and Bonner (2016) identified the exploration of new skills, rather than ‘adrenaline’, as a key motivator for continued skydiving participation.

The descriptive theme “confidence” was reported as an important flow antecedent in quantitative studies, Specifically, Schüler and Nakamura (2013) found a strong correlation between rock-climbers’ self-confidence and their experience of flow (r = 0.51, p < .001). Delle Fave et al. (2003) also found that high-altitude rock-climbers’ confidence levels were significantly higher during flow states (t(217) = 8.96, p < .011) in comparison to their mean confidence levels during states of anxiety, boredom, and apathy.

In contrast to antecedents, the descriptive theme “inhibitor” was comprised of elements reported to hinder flow in the adventure recreation context. Unsurprisingly, most of the reported inhibitors were identified as the absence, or opposite, of antecedents identified above. For instance, flow was inhibited for kayakers when a challenge was perceived as too high because this created higher anxiety and, subsequently, lower levels of flow (Jones et al., 2000). However, flow remained possible when the high challenge was appraised as being achievable (Swann, Crust, Jackman, et al., 2017). In addition, multiple studies suggested flow was inhibited by self-awareness, being overly ‘self-competitive’, or feeling pressured by others to ‘hurry’ (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975; Hardie-Bick & Scott, in press; Kiewa, 2001).

Flow characteristics. The analytical theme flow characteristics reflected elements that were reported to occur during flow states. This analytical theme was comprised of the descriptive themes: “time transformation”, “sense of control”, “focus on activity”, and “effortlessness”.

Csikszentmihalyi (1975) initially suggested that rock-climbers underestimated the passage of time when anxious (i.e., perceived time was accelerated), overestimated the passage of time when bored, and were not cognisant of time when in flow. A lack of time awareness during flow was corroborated by adventure racers (Mykletun & Mazza, 2016), surfers (Stranger, 1999), and modern-day rock-climbers (Hardie-Bick & Bonner, 2016). Conversely, Partington et al. (2009) found some surfers in flow experienced time as slowing down, while Jones et al. (2000) found kayakers’ perception of time sped up significantly when they were in flow. Taken together, this review provides evidence that the passage of time is perceived as altered during flow in adventure recreation. However, the quality of that time transformation appears to vary across activities and participants.

These studies also suggested that the adventure recreation context provided participants with greater sense of control than daily living activities (e.g., driving a car; Csikszentmihalyi, 1975) or guided adventure activities such as bungee jumping (Hardie-Bick & Bonner, 2016). For instance, self-control was found to significantly correlate (r = 0.47, p < .001) with flow indicators among mountaineers (Tsaur et al. 2013). Potentially unique to the adventure recreation context were findings that participants highlighted the importance of controlling what could be perceived as uncontrollable (e.g., the ‘bumps’ and ‘chops’ of a big wave; Partington et al., 2009). Moreover, increased opportunities for self-determination afforded by the adventure recreation context (e.g., the ability to choose a particular activity and/or how and where one wanted to engage in it) were also reported to provide a greater sense of control during flow (Kiewa, 2001).

The importance of the theme “focus on activity” was reflected by the volume of articles (k = 11) citing this characteristic. During flow, participants reported higher levels of concentration on and absorption in the task at hand, as well as improved focus on a specific stimulus. In tandem with an intense focus on the activity, participants reported a loss of self-consciousness. In other words, participants in flow did not have any thoughts about their current performance or worries about everyday life (e.g., bills, household chores; Hardie-Bick & Bonner, 2016; Partington et al., 2009).

The descriptive theme “effortlessness” was interpreted from a wide range of articles. When in flow, participants reported being able to “go hard” while simultaneously being relaxed (Houge Mackenzie et al., 2011), and having a sense of everything happening automatically, without having to think deliberately about decision making (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975; Jones et al., 2000). Quantitative questionnaire items that reflected the ‘effortless’ theme and significantly correlated with flow included: the absence of tension and the presence of ‘activation’ (Jones et al., 2000; Jones et al., 2003).

Consequences. The analytical theme consequences reflected experiences that occurred as a result of flow. This theme included the descriptive themes: “optimal performance”, “well-being”, “progression”, “motivation”, “spirituality”, and “negative consequences of flow”.

The descriptive theme “optimal performance” designated flow experiences associated with optimal or enhanced performance. For example, enhanced performance was suggested by participants in qualitative articles to be a consequence of experiencing flow (Partington et al., 2009; Swann, Crust, Jackman, et al., 2017). In addition, Sklett, Lorås, and Sigmundsson (2018) found a moderate correlation between a subscale of flow (Flow-Focus) and performance in ski-jumpers, which accounted for 13% of the variance in competition results. However, limited evidence was available in the adventure recreation literature to determine whether flow actually leads to enhanced performance. In contrast to objective measures of performance, surfers described feeling highly accomplished (Partington et al., 2009) and achieving feats that exceeded their expectations (Swann, Crust, Jackman, et al., 2017) as a result of flow. Overall, studies highlighted the importance of flow for optimal performance in the adventure recreation context, which includes personal accomplishments and optimal experiences, and may or may not be associated with increases in objective performance.

The descriptive theme “well-being” incorporated a variety of hedonic (e.g., positive emotions, excitement) and eudaimonic (e.g., self-fulfilment) components of well-being. The majority of the studies identified various well-being outcomes, ranging from enjoyment (e.g., Swann, Crust, Jackman, et al., 2017) to self-fulfilment, associated with flow. For instance, surfers reported that excitement led to flow, which in turn led to self-fulfilment (Partington et al., 2009). Flow was found to mediate the positive relationship between participation in surfing and overall well-being (Cheng & Lu, 2015). Quantitative measures of flow were also found to correlate with positive affect (Jones et al., 2000; Jones et al., 2003) and happiness (t(216) = 5.78, p < .011; Delle Fave et al., 2003; standardised structural path coefficient = .39, t = 6.15, p < .001; Tsaur et al. 2013).

The descriptive theme “motivation” reflected explanations of how flow experiences influenced participation in adventure recreation. For example, the euphoric experience of flow, above and beyond any extrinsic rewards, was identified as a motivation for continued participation (Partington et al., 2009; Swann et al., 2019). Intrinsic motivation was significantly higher following states of flow than states of anxiety, boredom, or apathy (Delle Fave et al., 2003). Furthermore, intrinsic motivation for kayaking was significantly correlated with flow (r = 0.51, p < .0001; Jones et al., 2000). The autotelic experience (Morgan, 2016; Tsaur et al. 2013), described by Jackson and Eklund (2004) as doing something for its own sake, similarly showed strong correlations with overall flow state scores. Therefore, it is possible that intrinsic motivation and the autotelic experience might be indistinguishable at an experiential level.

The descriptive theme “spirituality” included evidence of transcendental experiences resulting from experiencing flow in adventure recreation. This theme involved participants feeling a part of something greater than themselves following a flow experience. Csikszentmihalyi (1975) initially documented this experience among rock-climbers, and subsequent studies supported these findings (Mykletun & Mazza, 2016; Stranger, 1999). In addition, a psychometric measure of transcendental experiences correlated significantly with the experience of flow in mountaineering (standardised structural path coefficient = .62, t = 9.97, p < .001; Tsaur et al. 2013). It is noteworthy that an unreported number of participants in Csikszentmihalyi’s (1975) original work held sceptical views regarding the notion of transcendental experiences resulting from rock-climbing.

The descriptive theme “progression” reflected the way in which flow may contribute to improving the skill levels of adventure recreation participants. For example, skydivers progressively challenged themselves to master new aerial positions (Hardie-Bick & Bonner, 2016). The myriad possibilities afforded by adventure recreation contexts (e.g., vast variety of potential rock-climbing routes; Csikszentmihalyi, 1975), gave participants continual opportunities to increase challenge levels, experience flow, and consequently improve their skills (Houge Mackenzie et al., 2011; Partington et al., 2009).

Although experiencing flow led to improved skills, continually striving to find flow was also reported to have negative consequences. Interestingly, the descriptive theme “negative consequences of flow” was identified in only two studies and included two codes. First, more intense experiences of flow correlated with an underestimation of perceived risk and objectively risky behaviours (Schüler & Nakamura, 2013). In addition, Partington et al. (2009) found some big wave surfers exhibited symptoms akin to addiction in their flow-seeking surfing activities. Current understandings of the negative consequences of flow in adventure recreation are limited to these two findings.

Conceptual Differences. The analytical theme of conceptual differences reflected the descriptive themes relating to the diversity of flow models and states of optimal experience present in the research on flow in the adventure recreation context. Several models of flow were used in adventure recreation research. The original flow model (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975), which predicted flow as a result of a skill-challenge balance, was not as successful at explaining variances in flow indicators as the four-channel flow model (Massimini & Carli, 1988), which incorporated states of flow, anxiety, boredom, and apathy. However, the four-channel flow model only accounted for a small proportion of the variance and was statistically similar to the Adventure Experience Paradigm (AEP; Martin & Priest, 1986), which predicted peak adventure as a consequence of a balance in perceived risk and competence (Jones et al., 2000; Jones et al., 2003).

Despite the focus on flow states in this review, some articles provided evidence of related, but distinct, types of optimal experiences. For example, Houge Mackenzie et al. (2011) found that participants experienced a state the authors identified as ‘paratelic flow’, when participants were relaxed and lacked a specific goal. In contrast, Houge Mackenzie et al. (2011) described important, clear outcome goals as leading to ‘telic flow’. Swann, Crust, Jackman et al. (2017) similarly described two distinct optimal states: (i) a flow state, which shared commonalities with paratelic flow in that it was associated with exploratory or open goals and (ii) a clutch state, which shared commonalities with telic flow, such as the importance of fixed or outcome goals. Overall, evidence in this review supported recent proposals regarding the existence of distinct types of optimal experiences, which may have been confounded in earlier research on flow in the adventure recreation context.

After data synthesis was completed, a sensitivity analysis was undertaken. This analysis revealed that the majority of the codes (>69%) underpinning descriptive themes, were found in more than one article, and that the majority of themes were substantiated by triangulation of evidence from several primary articles. However, based on the sensitivity analyses, five of the 14 codes created from unique articles were identified as having potential quality concerns (see Appendix E). First, the code that described flow as a mediator of participation in adventure recreation and its effect on improved well-being may be limited by the content validity of the adapted flow questionnaire used by Cheng and Lu (2015). Second, the lack of methodological transparency in Csikszentmihalyi’s early work (1975) means the codes ‘unpredictability’ and ‘absence of transcendental experiences’ should be interpreted cautiously. Third, limited data were provided by Kiewa (2001) to support the code that ‘self-determinism facilitates flow’. Fourth, the small sample sizes of adventure recreation participants included by Schüler and Nakamura (2013) and Swann, Crust, Jackman et al. (2017) respectively indicate that the codes ‘risk increase with flow’ and ‘positive distractions’ should be cautiously interpreted. Taken together, these limitations highlight current gaps in knowledge about flow in the adventure recreation context. The following discussion outlines points of consensus and contention, and addresses the questions posed in this review.

Section snippets
Discussion
The aim of this review was to identify what is known about flow states that occur during adventure recreation. Consequently, this discussion will address (i) what is known about the antecedents, characteristics, and consequences of flow states within adventure recreation (ii) the definition of flow states used in adventure recreation research, and (iii) methodological issues in the study of flow within adventure recreation.

Conclusion
In line with Csikszenmihalyi’s (1975) original work on flow, the results of this review demonstrated that flow is a complex psychological state involving multiple stages (e.g., antecedents, characteristics, consequences). The findings from this review revealed unique flow antecedents present in adventure recreation contexts. Specifically,