AdVEnturE SPortS PrActIcE In ScHooL And rISK cALcuLAtEd
Marcelo Paraíso Alves,
UniFOA – Centro Universitário de Volta Redonda/Instituto Federal de Ciência e Tecnologia do Rio de Janeiro
(marceloparaiso@outlook.com)
Maria da Conceição Vinciprova Fonseca
UniFOA – Centro Universitário de Volta Redonda
(concyvf@uol.com.br)
Cassio Martins
UniFOA – Centro Universitário de Volta Redonda
(cassiofoa@ig.com.br)
Rodolfo Guimarães Silva
UniFOA – Centro Universitário de Volta Redonda
(rodolforio.vr@gmail.com)
Gustavo Slves Vinand kozlowski de Farias
UniFOA – Centro Universitário de Volta Redonda
(gustavo_kozlowski@hotmail.com)
ABStrAct
This paper aims to discuss the relationship between School Physical Education, Adventure Sport more specifically 
the Mountaineering and the care with the safety standards. First we try to understand, from the published studies, 
Mountaineering practices carried out in daily school life and what the relationship with the safety standards through 
the literature review. Later we promote the implementation of a teaching and learning process with the Mountain 
as a content of School Physical Education classes with safety standards as a backdrop of the given classes. Such 
action enabled the creation a product: Video guide for use of safety standards and equipment on the practice of 
Mountaineering with a didactic sequence of eight lessons.
Keywords: School Physical Education, Adventure Sports, Calculated Risk, Safety Standards.
1. IntroductIon
The sport, in recent decades has become the hegemonic content of physical education classes, but a few sports 
are elected by teachers (BETTI, 1999). Poli et al (2012) and Richter (2013) reiterating that background mentioning that 
usually the classes focus on ball sports (volleyball, basketball, football and handball).
Thus, this paper aims to discuss the relationship between the School Physical Education, the Adventure Sports, 
specifically the Mountaineering, and the care with the safety standards.
However, this work is justified by the significant increase in the number of physical education professionals that 
using that sports practice as an educational teaching resource in schools (SCHWARTZ, 2006; LUREANO 2012; 
LUIZ RUFINO, 2012; SANTOS; GOMES; PEREIRA, 2012; SILVA; RAMOS; PEREIRA, 2012).
As a methodological way this study was developed through literature review, “for it to provide professionals in any 
field, information on the current development of science and its literature” (Figueiredo, 2004, p. 23). Subsequently, 
the creation of a video guide covering the theme of work.
The analyzed emerge from the following journals: Scielo databases, Magazine Movement, Journal of Science and 
Movement, Connections and the Brazilian Congress of Adventure Activities. The choice of these was due insertion 
of these in the field of Physical Education and Adventure Sports.
As inclusion criteria for research in magazines was instituted original articles published from January 2010 to 
December 2015. The terms used to search were School Physical Education, Adventure Sports, Calculated Risk and 
Parallel Session III
307
Safety Standards. Already in the Annals of the Brazilian CBAA- Adventure Activities Congress, we highlight the 
works that contemplate the practice of adventure sports in school taking into account oral presentations and posters.
2. AdVEnturE SPort, cALcuLAtEd rISK And ScHooL PHYSIcAL 
EducAtIon
According to Costa (1999), the calculated risk explodes in fascination with vertigo, which favors a kind of 
inebriation and a domain of its effects, to the author the calculated risk is the possibility of occurring the dangerous 
situation, the likelihood and consequences of a particular event.
The Adventure Sports is guided by emotions, therefore, is established by a relationship with the risk, however, 
fictitiously due to the use of safety equipment and procedures.
Santos (2013) with respect to Adventure Sports, also mentions that the risks, uncertainty, contact with nature and 
equipment may contribute to the Physical Education School for the pleasure that this body practice provides students. 
In addition to allowing the practitioner “confronted with it, thus overcoming limits, overcome challenges, overcome 
barriers, having no limitation of time, space, age and sex” (p. 70).
3. PrESEntAtIon oF tHE rESuLtS
Initially, we chose to present the data quantitatively, to later present the results through thematic divisions created 
in an attempt to explain the specificities found in the investigation.
Table 01 - Number of articles found in the SCIELO database, Magazine Movement, Journal of Science and Motion 
Magazine Connections
ScIELo MoVEMEnt ScIEncE And MoVEMEnt conEctIonS
School Physical Education 36 32 47 4
Adventure Sports 1 20 1 2
Calculated Risk 0 15 1 0
Safety Standards 0 16 1 0
In Scielo database when we use the term Physical Education found thirty-six articles, but were not related to 
Adventure Sports. Regarding Calculated Risk and Safety Standards did not find any article. In this database, to 
investigate the term Adventure Sport, only one article was found (PASSION et al, 2011). The authors show that the 
perception of risk by Adventure Sport instructors stem from an attitude in which the prevailing confidence in the field 
of technology and quality of the equipment at the time of these bodily practices with nature. However, the article was 
discarded because it does not include the evidence in this study that charted are sports practice in the school setting 
adventure.
As we begin the research in the journal Movement are faced with the following data:
Using the term School Physical Education allowed to find thirty-two articles, and none of the works referred 
to the Adventure Sports. By using the term Adventure Sport found twenty works, of which we highlight the study 
ARMBRUST et al., (2010), reporting that Extreme sports have been discussions of objects due to the interest of 
applicability of their leisure-related content, the sport and education. However, there are still certain professional 
unpreparedness to undertake these activities, making it difficult to implement such practices in educational levels. The 
author aimed in this study present a methodology for organizing a university extension course for graduate students 
and physical education teachers, in order to promote reflection on the processes of initiation to the practice of 
skateboarding linked to sport education through a methodology that includes the elements of the body culture to be 
experienced in the school environment and effectively contribute to the human development process in the biological, 
psychological, social and cultural aspects.
Going forward, the Movement magazine, using the term “Calculated Risk” were found fifteen articles, two of 
which deal for sports adventure, gliding and diving, but did not include the school. But the term “Safety Standards” 
allowed us to find sixteen articles, which have also been discarded as they discuss the Adventure Sport School.
We also verified that the work Armbrust et al., (2010) makes a reference to Adventure Sport in schools, but does 
not establish a relationship with the rules and safety procedures.
Looking at the above table, we realized that the Brazilian Journal of Science and Movement reveals the following 
data: When we employ the term “Physical Education” found forty-seven articles. The works were discarded because 
Proceedings of the International Congress on Interdisciplinarity in Social and Human Sciences
308
they do not include the Adventure Sport in school. In that journal (Journal of Science and Movement), the terms 
“Adventure Sports”, “Risk Calculated” and “Safety Standards” presented as a result only one article (Silva et al., 2010). 
Although the study bring in scope bodily practices in nature and actual or calculated risk, the product was discarded 
by not establishing a dialogue with the school context.
Already Magazine Connections with respect to physical education term got four jobs that were not discarded by 
the confluence with the Adventure Sports. Regarding the terms “Calculated Risk” and “Safety Rules” were not found 
work.
The term “Adventure Sport”, to be used as reference in the search, allowed to find two jobs, one of which was 
discarded by not contemplate the school and the other (ALMEIDA and Gaspari, 2014) emerged from an interview 
with Teacher Dimitri Wuo Pereira, who works in the Adventure sports area and stands out on the national scene 
for its pioneering and publications on the subject. In question number five the authors emphasize the inclusion of 
Adventure Sports in school. Professor Dimitri points out that the Adventure Sport is gaining more visibility, but take 
it to school is still a challenge, both for lack of space and appropriate equipment, and by the fear of coordinators and 
directors who still believe that this is an activity dangerous.
Another important aspect to be highlighted in the article mentioned was security within the school context. The 
authors report the importance of knowing the techniques and procedures of each modality so that the teacher can 
help your student to recognize the dangers controlling risks, and to develop teaching strategies to motivate students 
and prevent accidents.
Regarding the Annals of the Brazilian Adventure Activities Congress (CBAA), it is important to point out that we 
did not perform search to identify the Adventure Sport, as performed in periodic, because the works approved for 
this scientific event has already met this demand. Therefore, research has developed in an attempt to find the work 
that referred to the calculated risk and safety standards at the school.
Table 02 - Number of articles found in the Brazilian Adventure Activities Congress (CBAA)
CBAA (2010 - 2015)
trabalhos orais no âmbito escolar 16
Pôster no âmbito escolar 38
totAL dE trABALHoS PuBLIcAdoS 54
It should be emphasized that in addition to complete relating to oral presentations work also analyzed the abstracts 
from the presentations of posters. The intention to consider such productions emerge from the need to manage to 
map the use of Risk Calculated notions and Safety Standards in pedagogical research and actions undertaken with the 
Adventure Sport School. It is important to clarify that this scientific event (CBAA), the period between January 2010 
and July 2015, occurred in the following years: 2010, 2011, 2012, 2014.
As we can see the results detailed in the table - 02, the CBAA published (16) sixteen works as oral presentations, 
which referred to the practice of adventure in the school context.
Regarding the CBAA summaries published (38) thirty-eight works that established relationship with Adventure 
Sport School.
Thus, adding the number of sixteen (16) and oral presentations (38) thirty-eight abstracts were analyzed (54) 
fifty-four works, which later to a new analysis led to the disposal of (19) nineteen works, as were works with incipient 
information by being in progress and review work that did not reveal significant practices of everyday school life. 
Therefore (35) thirty-five works of CBAA were analyzed.
The intention to submit the data entered in the articles and their specificities, we chose to present them from two 
issues of interest to this research: the use of the Adventure Sport School and the use of safety standards in actions 
Sport Adventure in school. We consider it important to note the limitations of this study and the deepening of the 
data analyzed, as much of the material emerges summaries, so the material had little information about the research 
developed, and many studies were in development.
3.1 Ways to use and make the Adventure Sport
We do not claim to present at this point, what we consider right or wrong about the way the Adventure Sport 
is being developed in schools because we know that modern science was formed through selection procedures, 
classification, prioritization, simplification data.
Thus, it should be noted that some studies show as the central motor skill issues and concerns with the technique. 
Clearly the body technique is part of human learning, Mauss (1974) and its prestigious imitation studies is a fact. For 
the author the successful actions tend to be imitated, then perhaps the understanding of the globalization of the 
Parallel Session III
309
sport. But this will be the exclusive concern of professional physical education in school?
The work of Santos (2010), for example, emphasizes the importance of presenting some teaching methods 
in performing skateboard lessons. The author points out some methodological aspects developed in the Physical 
Education classes related to pedagogical part and mentions the lack of published works in relation to teaching and 
learning to skate mode.
The work of Celestino et al. (2011), developed at the State School Professor Francisco José Perioto, MandaguaçuPR, found the demand potential for adventure activity in this school, being evidenced the lack of proposals and public 
initiatives for skateboard practice offers. The study presents the results of initiation classes in that sport practice, 
aiming to identify the perception of students in the eighth year on the practice of skateboarding as a school subject. 
The authors realized that skateboarding is seen predominantly as a sport by the students, with a complementary view 
linking the adventure. We do not have parameters to state that the mentioned authors summarize their speeches to the 
forms of development of motor skills, but there is no evidence that you have made a break with that model.
Silva et al. (2011) collected information on the possibility of using adventure activities, especially activities on 
wheels - scooters, skates and skate - like content of physical education classes. The authors found that such practices 
constitute innovative curriculum component within the Physical Education area, and may extend in an integrated 
manner the experiences of school subjects, and thus enable experiences that lead to the acquisition of new knowledge 
and learning. Although the authors do not mention what knowledge or learning adventure activities can leverage, 
we realized that the study of Silva et al. (2011) is, as emphasized Betti and Zuliani (2002) concern with the other 
components of body culture in your life, so that the student can take maximum advantage.
Another study was analyzed Auricchio et al. (2011). For the authors, Physical Education is the school environment 
that allows students to experience the movements, and through this trial, should develop a body knowledge and 
awareness of the reasons that lead him to practice these movements. However, the authors mention that this does 
not always happen, and part of the students end up discouraging the physical education classes. For the authors, 
this motivation begins at the end of elementary school, when they start to have a more critical view of reality, not 
attributing to physical education as important as the critical adolescent did not have to use the practices to the world 
outside school, ie the Physical Education class, applied in the same manner and with the same content from the 
elementary school, does not interesting.
On the one hand we have works that seek their way to make with reference to the gesture and the ability of 
other find some work looking for the Adventure Sports and Environmental Education as operations and way of 
doing everyday. We can not tell whether increasing the number of shares related to Physical Education (Adventure 
Sports) and environmental education should be national guidelines indicating the need for Environmental Education 
implementation effectively, continuous and transversalizante (BRAZIL, 1998) or whether this increase is due to a 
social behavior. However, for Domingues, Kunz and Araujo (2011) This is an unquestionable fact.
For example, Schittler et al. (2011) present a contextualization of the issues related to adventure practical in nature, 
among them rock climbing, rappelling, the tree climbing, the trail, adventure and orientation races. The authors 
establish a relationship of these contents with the pedagogical trends of school physical education, establishing 
a discussion about joining the sport merely reproduced in the media means. Both are opposed to this model by 
Movement Body Culture.
And Cardozo and Neto (2010) observed that the Adventure Sports circulate in Brazilian culture, part of the 
imagination of children, youth and adolescents attending schools and consequently may be inserted in the sports 
group developed in the Physical Education classes . Thinking from Maffesoli (2009) realized that that imagination 
can approach behavior initiated by the emotional ambience, behavior that emerges from affection: shared passions.
Already Ferreira (2012) and realizes that students are suffering influences of the media. The author mentions that 
the adventure activities at school, through the influence of the media / technology, influence the physical education 
classes as the dissemination of knowledge. However, the media has a reductionist view of this activity, so that students 
interested in sports that are fashionable and often do not value the aspects of environmental awareness in which the 
adventure activities are inserted.
Richter (2010) reports that, according to the guidelines of the National Curriculum Parameters (PCN’s), the Physical 
Education classes should cover activities that provide opportunities to develop affective dimensions, cognitive, motor 
and socio-cultural students.
In the study of Junior (2014), developed the verification of slackline practice in physical education, understanding it 
as a new pedagogical practice. The authors realized that provide differentiated pedagogical practices through slackline 
allowed systematize guiding principles: sport, education and nature. The author related the adventure activities in the 
discipline of Physical Education, based on the perspective of the National Curriculum Parameters, considering the 
cross-cutting theme Environment.
It seems to us that the above study approaches of Rodrigues and Darido ideas (2006), as the authors mention that 
the crosscutting themes in physical education classes is a possible way for teachers who intend to discuss the various 
Proceedings of the International Congress on Interdisciplinarity in Social and Human Sciences
310
problems that emerge in relationship between society and the environment. The Souza research and Sousa (2014) 
reaffirms the relationship between society and the environment previously explained, because the study aimed to 
identify and analyze the possibilities and the challenges of adventure activities in nature in the teaching of Physical 
Education in Public Schools of Belém-PA. The authors conclude that, in the face of many challenges imposed by a 
capitalist society, the teacher can be a mediator in performing different bodily practices, providing a critical position 
of the student in front of reality.
The study by Euflausino (2014) presents the students’ vision and attitudinal, conceptual and procedural dimensions 
of the contents applied to Adventure Activities. The survey data reveal that that sport has great acceptance in schools. 
The authors concluded that you can enter the Adventure Activities in school, provided it is in a planned and worked 
as the other content of physical education.
Another study that goes in the same direction is the research Martins et al. (2014) that discussed the physical 
education, specifically freediving as a space whose potential transversalizante allowing dialogue with other fields of 
knowledge: Geography, Biology, History, and other themes (sustainability, environment, solidarity, ethical values , 
among others) enabling articulation with the Environmental Education. For the authors, it was possible to understand 
that environmental education can be developed as an integrated educational practice of physical education, as in 
adventure activities, the teacher has the function of mediating the building of mutual respect, responsibility, 
solidarity, confidence, change behavior, ethics, conservation of natural resources, among other values that are part of 
environmental education and quality of life.
In this same line of thought Carvalho, Bernardes and Pinheiro (2010), argue that the Adventure Sport can be 
inserted as a subject in school physical education classes, contributing to the training of citizens, because it proposes 
a practice that goes beyond the traditional forms, allowing dialogue with other social issues. Another differentiated 
practice emerges from studies of Madeira (2011) finds that in-class ride a way to approach the subject of reality and 
cause students to build systemically its references about the complexity of the world.
Already Piovani (2010) performs the reflection on the responsibility of the teacher of physical education in the 
formation of knowledge, environmental awareness and the use of leisure and contribution in the formation of 
citizens able to leverage the essence of being human. The study’s purpose was to find in physical education a tool 
to develop environmental education, providing knowledge of sports and adventure activities such as an awareness 
experience, enriching recreational opportunities, as well as generating the student of a socio-driving development and 
physical conditions for the practice of these activities.
Freitas and Rufino (2012) argue that the Adventure Physical Activities (AFAS) being held in the natural, urban or 
artificial, so that they may in fact happen in the school context should be adapted. These are activities that develop 
in the perspective of controlled risk and provide different sensations, and there a long time, and are gaining more 
space today. The authors discuss the importance of AFAS in Physical Education from the understanding of culture 
of body movement and report the lack of publications on the subject, and through a literature in books, articles, 
websites and magazines. Freitas and Rufino (2012) conclude that: being the Adventure Physical Activities belonging 
to the culture of body movement, it is necessary that this be introduced in school, providing the experience of other 
bodily manifestations, considering the learning values related to the environment, as well as diversifying the activities 
offered as contents in Physical Education classes.
Light et al. (2014) sought to analyze the canopy as a pedagogical tool educational intervention. The intention of 
the authors was that the concepts and definitions, as well as the experiences of tree climbing practices, contribute to 
the research participants to assimilate the content related to environmental preservation.
Neta line of thought, Mota (2012) reports that the adventure and sports activities in natural environments have 
been highlighted as collective identification symbols and sporting culture that relate to ecology, adventure and courage.
The work Liryo et al. (2014) focuses on the description of the Green Project Athletes. The authors report that 
this project has been done in several public schools in the municipality of Vila Velha - ES. The project consists of 
performing a track in Morro Moreno, covering 4 km away in two hours, including reflective activities of recreational 
and ecological character. The activities had as a goal the environmental issues, using the Environment Week as guiding 
the actions.
Another work that seeks the Environmental Education as a dialogue for physical education classes was to Nazario 
et al. (2010). The authors create a space for reflection and critical challenge of reality in physical education classes 
through adventure activities. To Nazario et al. (2010), to discuss environmental issues, physical education becomes an 
important space for critical reflection to rethink the social reality in which subjects are immersed.
The study by Araújo et al. (2011) develops its educational activities from Surf. The survey was conducted in a public 
school located in the city of Saquarema - RJ. The research objective was to conduct an initial survey on how this sport 
is working in school and raise questions about the relationship of Adventure Sports in nature.
Soares (2012) discusses how physical education classes are presented with a space conducive to the insertion of 
Adventure Sport, for this discipline considers the body culture movement, in which the bodies are not only drivers of 
Parallel Session III
311
physical structure, but develop ability to learn about themselves, enhance the environment and use up the movement 
to know or recognize the neighborhood, the village, the center, the city, the state and perhaps the world, making the 
subject feel part of the environment in which inhabits. The authors address the nature walk as an alternative that can 
be used during a lesson with the intention to bring the individual to the location of belonging where the person is 
located, and then establish an educational process of environmental awareness: “Physical Education while curricular 
component of basic education must then take another task: to introduce and integrate the student in the culture of 
body movement, forming the citizen who will produce it, play it and transforms it “(BETTI, ZULIANE, 2002, p 
750). .
Freitas et al. (2011) also relate to physical education to environmental education. The authors note the existing 
attitudinal behavior in relation to the practice of Adventure Physical Activities in nature with environmental education. 
The authors comment that would be interesting to the school community to value the practice of adventure as 
a way to approach the subject of nature, thus establishing three interdependent aspects: practice, environmental 
conservation and the educational process and may awaken in students a sensitivity and environmental responsibility.
It is important to point out that it seems that, in seeking the Adventure Sport the aforementioned studies seek 
to break away from a purely technicist practice approaching that mentions Rosa and Carvalhinho (2012, p. 260). 
For the authors currently “new educational paradigms have emerged between the scientific community, from which 
result different views and new issues, which tend to a complementary interaction.” Such complementation develops 
between theoretical (transmission of knowledge) and sensory experience.
The research and Pereira Bezerra (2012), when analyzing the practice of adventure activities in the school context 
for elementary school students, considered the application of adventure activities like content fosters the perception 
environmental partner of the students. The authors mention that the development of new themes in Physical 
Education classes promotes an enrichment learning in general (motor, cognitive and social), providing new findings 
by students. Regarding the above comments that Darido themes offer breaks to teachers seeking to hold a job 
overcoming the traditional proposals. For the author, one of the possibilities is the expansion of the concept of space 
for physical education classes, as space becomes enxergado under the dimensions of environmental elements: road 
conditions, air quality, sound treatment, absence of light , heat, climate change, among others.
Trauer (2011) reiterates the rupture of perspective with the traditional sport and its spaces to mention that the 
curricular organization of content in school and joints that offer adventure activities are subsidies to overcome 
the hegemonic educational practices. The testimony below reveals signs of necessity of overcoming the traditional 
practice in Physical Education:
Teacher 09:
I found it interesting that proposal by the difference of what we normally see ... in other schools I came from 
another school physical education activity was only with ball and it was kind of poorly organized, mountain 
climbing is very interesting.
Regarding the above, Rodrigues and Darido (2006, p.1) mention the Adventure Sport emerges as an “opposition 
to institutionalized aspect of the spectacle sport in which prevail mechanized practices, the effectiveness of the body 
yield and production of goods and services “. The authors also emphasize that the intention is to rescue the values 
such as self-realization, autonomy, cooperation and solidarity. In this sense, the authors mention the need to look 
carefully at the relationship between adventure sports scene and the culture of body movement.
In the work of Melo and Soares (2010), while discussing the importance of Adventure Activities in nature (AFAN), 
the authors develop an experience or actions using such content, just check through questionnaire, if AFAN are being 
held in the public school in the city of Bonito, MS (State of ecotourism capital), if the high school students to know 
and / or practice, and this knowledge / practices are acquired / held at the school.
In this line of action, also the study of Alves et al. (2012), aims to find out the opinion of students about the 
inclusion of sports in nature in physical education classes, specifically the Mountain theme emphasizes the broad 
acceptance of physical adventure activities in Physical Education, however it does not establish learning processes and 
pedagogical intervention, only has to research the perception of students.
3.2 Calculated and Safety Standards Risk
Whereas the concept of calculated risk emerges from a phenomenal dimension requires adentremos in a world 
whose reference is symbolic because as discussed by Costa (2000), the Adventure Sport practitioner is not a suicide, 
but a practitioner seeking uncertainty, slips, immersion, verticality, among other factors that are beyond the security 
of courts and soil fixity.
Proceedings of the International Congress on Interdisciplinarity in Social and Human Sciences
312
Thus, it is noteworthy that for the author, the calculated risk “allows man to play with chances to win, with the 
destinations and adversity, printing other senses that are distant ancestors of the sixteenth century” (COSTA, 2000, 
p. 5).
In this line of thought, it is important to note that resort to daring and space transgression requires a greater 
mastery of technique and safety to be used in the practice of Adventure Sport, with no room for negligence, technical 
disability and lack of attention. We are not arguing here that this kind of sports practice there is not the existence of 
unforeseen and uncertainty, but what we are emphasizing is the need for accurate calculation of planning and accident 
probability.
Given the above, it is important to point out which are the safety standards that will allow the lifting of risks and 
accidents possibilities for safe sports.
A study that allows us to reflect on the above issues is the work of revision of Leite et al. (2014), because the 
authors observed the frequency of papers presented during the seven Congress Adventure Activities for All. The 
research reveals that in the school setting the number of jobs is still low-key compared to the proposals of informal 
spaces. However, studies have shown that is possible to develop the adventure activities at school.
One aspect that draws our attention in the aforementioned work emerges from the difficulties of accepting risk 
activities at school. The authors report that this sport still faces the refusal of parents, teachers and principals. This 
factor is considered as limiting and the study suggests that teachers seek to develop training classes with meaningful 
content and securely in schools.
The interview with the students of IFRJ leads us to realize the importance in the field of technology for the 
practice of that sport in school:
Student 01:
We got to see a bit of how safety practices. We must be careful with our equipment, you have to have a 
theoretical basis for you to make use of this equipment (Interview on 11.05.2015).
Student 10:
There are a number of behaviors to be respected so we can make a safe practice, learn correct use of harness, 
carabiner, back up and equalization ... (Interview on 11.05.2015).
Student 11:
There are several ways of using the equipment and must always use the correct way to minimize the issue of 
an accident happening (Interview on 11.05.2015).
The survey excerpts reveal the importance in the field of technique so that you can practice Adventure Sports. But 
how to provide this knowledge without training and experience of the teacher?
Another work that emerges in research and relates to the notion of risk calculated is the work of Luiz et al. (2011), 
which discussed the inclusion of that sport in schools in physical education classes or extracurricular activities. The 
author considers the relevance of educational action, because realize that young people and children in this sport, 
have greater autonomy movements. Another aspect highlighted by the author was the relationship of the practice 
with the cooperative values among its practitioners. The work is still of concern and prevent problems that may occur 
in relation to accidents, a fact that allows us to realize that although the study did not present the safety standards 
required for such sports practice, at least points out that the teacher should have care possible accidents. Interviews 
with students IFRJ who attended classes on Mountaineering reveal clues about the calculated risk.
Student 01:
always to be careful to see if in fact the equipment is in the size of your body. In practice the Top Rope, which 
is the technique of Rapel, where else helps you security, we see that when we are practicing the sport with 
another person, you do not depend on you alone ... but also your partner is there helping your security for you 
to practice the sport in the best possible way (Interview on 05.11.2015).
Parallel Session III
313
Student 08:
I enjoyed the thrill of climbing like the adrenaline, it was good I was pretty sure to make the safety of my 
friends the techniques taught were very useful and felt safe at the time he was doing.
Student 12:
The classes enabled us to overcome fear due to compliance with the safety standards, we must make various 
adjustments that are individual for each one, my concept has changed with respect to the sport after I got to 
know.
In the narrative we can see evidence of the risk calculated (COSTA, 2000), as the student mentions the technical 
precautions to be taken to avoid accidents when the practice of Rapel. Evidenced the domain by the student when 
he identifies the technical name of the Top Rope and how it is executed. Another important aspect that emerges 
from the testimony and establishes a dialogue with the above research (LUIZ et al., 2011) are the values developed by 
the mentioned sport, because as we can see the authors mention that the cooperative values was a significant aspect 
among the young and teenagers and interview the student IFRJ reiterates the need for the interdependent relationship 
between its practitioners.
Another work that mentions the difficulties of insertion of Adventure Sports in school was the study Diogo et 
al. (2012). The research aimed to identify the reasons for non-acceptance of Adventure Sport theme as curriculum 
content in the classes of Physical Education. The authors concluded that that sport is not inserted within the school 
environment for the following reasons: Lack of training of teachers interviewed, teachers afraid to teach an activity 
in which there is a risk and a lack of technological resources necessary to practice the activity.
Silva, Kippert and Merlo (2010) present some limitations to the institution of the Adventure Sport at school: 
vocational training, school infrastructure, lack of equipment and limited understanding of the area of Physical 
Education.
Almeida and Gaspari (2014) to interview Professor Dimitri Wuo Pereira, an expert in Adventure Sports, mention 
that in relation to space the teacher should change your look to school, realizing the possibility of the practice of 
these sports. Regarding Dimitri Wuo Pereira materials mentions that teachers should know the procedures to create 
alternative equipment solutions. Another important aspect to be highlighted are the authors’ observations about 
security. The aforementioned teacher mentions the need to know the techniques and procedures of each mode, 
because that way the teacher can promote in his student, recognition of the dangers controlling the risks. Regarding 
school teachers the teacher is emphatic: training and experience. The testimony of one of the students IFRJ reveals 
such learning:
Student 02:
The first time I was trying to find my own way without paying much attention ... anyway. But if you pay 
attention to the advice that the teacher gives the easiest way and the best support to climb becomes much more 
fun and easier you feel safer ... The first time I was halfway up the climbing wall, I was with some fear when it 
falls did not rise more, but when watched my friends saw that the information given by teachers actually work 
and made it to the top ... the orientation of teachers and the use of equipment do you feel is a safe practice that 
makes you want to try again ... (Interview on 05.11.2015).
Student 03:
In classes were explained all the equipment and how to operate the rules and the agency responsible for so 
equipment you are unsure about this knows that the chair and the carabiner will not drop the Tyrolean practices 
and tope rope these experiences in the school helps understand the feeling at the time to practice climbing and 
have security when done to someone else when you are up there you know that drop the equipment will hold 
and you will not hurt you (Interview in 05/11 / 2015.
We found in the above statement, evidence of a pedagogy that uses the calculated risk and safety standards as a 
knowledge to the practice of Adventure Sport, as the student seeks to overcome the fear two things: the teacher’s 
guidance and proper use equipment. Thus, using the concept of calculated risk to realize the possibility of the 
accident, but overcomes this danger with the technical information they got.
A relevant aspect to highlight is the way the student “uses” the information coming to you giving a personal 
Proceedings of the International Congress on Interdisciplinarity in Social and Human Sciences
314
consumption (CERTEAU, 2011), for realizing that in an attempt was unsuccessful, reworks the information and 
from the experience of others students decide to retrace your route your way, establishing a dialogue with their first 
experience using the experiences of colleagues, the technical information acquired in class and the teacher’s guidance.
A study that goes towards meeting the technical demands of the physical education teacher was the research of 
Silva et al. (2012). The research aimed to discuss with the teachers of Physical Education the possibility, simply and 
securely, applying a climbing class at school level, while not having an experience in Adventure Sports.
A job that goes in the same perspective mentioned by Professor Dimitri Wuo Pereira, in relation to the technique 
of knowledge, was the Martins research (2010). The author emphasizes the need for improved security, but the study 
finds that the motor aspects is to provide greater security and confidence to the practitioner. It should be noted that 
this study does not approach the relationship proposed by this dissertation, security emerging standards and safe 
behaviors.
Junior and Bezerra (2012) also analyzed the application of Adventure Sport activities while content of physical 
education classes, and likewise realized that the students have minimal information on that sport in the classes of 
that discipline. This evidence reveals evidence of the need to take the information students can assist the technical 
procedures and safety standards, as required by the educational material proposed by this dissertation. The following 
statements reveal evidence that when the student obtains information on this practice, fears of making the Adventure 
Sport are minimized:
Student 06:
We were able to put into practice at the time of various theoretical concepts climbing that were placed in the 
classroom, we always have to pay attention and make it easy to minimize the mistakes and do it always with the 
help of teachers must take the theoretical concept and put it into practice we must always overcome our fear 
always very calm and always pay attention to the use of equipment whenever possible (Interview granted on 
11.05.2016).
Student 08:
The classes we had in IFRJ they taught us how to use the equipment prepared us to get here, if we had arrived 
here without any theoretical knowledge that would be far more frightening than it was ... At the top of a little 
afraid even but very cool and the thrill of reaching La, it is important to be very careful in order to get to the 
end.
According to Oliveira (2012) curriculum is built from subjectivities networks in which the subjects are immersed, 
so starting from this perspective we realize that collectively woven practices in the school ground approach the 
curriculum notion as a daily creation, as for author subjects pensampraticam a unique curriculum that emerges from 
the demands, needs and aspirations of that community. Thus we see that the evidence of the student 06 meets the 
demands mentioned by Junior and Bezerra (2011), take students with the knowledge necessary for safe practice.
In Ferreira’s research (2012), the approach is given in the context of adventure activities. The authors question 
the influence of the media in physical education classes through the dissemination of knowledge and practice of 
adventure activities. The authors conclude that this type of activity mobilizes students through the sensations of 
pleasure and fun, which emerge in search words and phrases: “cool”, “exciting”, “challenge”, “butterflies”, “one who 
It is done in the bush “,” what happens in high places, “among others. We consider it important to emphasize that, 
in the above work, the risk involves activities was highlighted as a limiting factor of this body practice (Adventure 
Sports) in schools.
The working Balbino et al. (2012) as the aforementioned work, analyzed the motivational factors for adherence and 
practice of sport climbing. Those involved in the research practiced climbing for three months, which allowed the 
authors realize that the motivational factors for the escalation of practice are related to overcoming challenges and 
transgression of own limits, whether physical or psychological.
Regarding the work of Ferreira (2012) and Balbino et al. we realize that the Adventure Sport in the perception 
of the authors approach the prospect of Le Breton (2012). For the author, there are four anthropological figures 
intersect in characterizing the conduct of risk: ordeal, sacrifice, and no confrontation. Note that these figures are not 
mutually exclusive but complementary.
For him, the ordeal is a behavior that emerges from the need to engage in a personal test to test the legitimacy 
of life, as a result of social bonds has not yet been possible to experience: “He symbolically asks death, and the fact 
survive ensures the value of its existence “LE BRETON, 2012, p. 35).
Le Breton notes that the sacrifice the young “sacrifice a part of themselves to save what it considers essential” 
Parallel Session III
315
(ibid., P. 35). The scarification, anorexia, multiple forms of addiction such as substance abuse, are examples of this 
behavior.
Absence is a behavior that seeks deletion. For Le Breton (2012) we found examples in blind adherence to a sect, the 
escape from reality through drugs or other products in the coma search and not the sensations caused by substances.
Finally, the clash is a clash of behavior with others, through violent acts, attitudes considered as the absence of 
limits and disregard for social rules.
In line with this, the risk behaviors are symbolic actions that seek to move away from the “inability to again 
become an actor of his own existence” (ibid., 36). Considering these assumptions, we can perhaps understand the 
motivation of adolescents in this type of body practice, it is through contact with the danger that the student that the 
student discovers potential not yet envisioned for it in their daily lives.
Araújo et al. (2014), through an extension project developed by Leisure Studies Group (GEL), developed a study in 
partnership with schools of public and private networks interested in promoting a period of pedagogical interventions 
in the Adventure Sport. The authors report that, in general, the comments regarding the experiences were considered 
significant. The project developed the Day of Adventure with the pedagogical teams of the participating schools, 
seeking to add to their practice the knowledge acquired and fostering Adventure Sport classes safely and systematically. 
The work included the Adventure Sport in schools, maintaining a dialogue with the question of security linked closely 
to the systematization of that body practice in Physical Education.
The study by Araújo et al. (2014) reveals the practice of clues that might help overcome the fear of school in 
developing the Adventure Sport as a content as Almeida and Gaspari (2014) mention that two difficulties encountered 
in the integration of that sport in school life emerge from the resistance direction of the school and later those 
responsible for the students. In this sense, we realized that the project (Day Adventure) provides overcoming this 
scenario, because in Dimitri Wuo Pereira perspective school should promote events that propitiate the presence of 
parents, as those responsible for the students are unaware of what we know and the experiences we have to offer to 
students.
In view of the studies analyzed in 2010 CBAA Annals of 2014, we can see a gap in the discussion held around 
the Adventure Sport in the school context in relation to the calculated risk and safety standards, because despite Luiz 
work et al . (2011), Junior and Bezerra (2012), Silva et al. (2012), Laureano (2012), Araújo et al. (2014) establish a risk 
with dialogue, we have not had a similarity with the proposed theme in this work: the importance of work safety 
rules and procedures systematically as a subject in Adventure Sports lessons, specifically Mountaineering in Physical 
Education.
4. FInAL conSIdErAtIonS
The pedagogical rethink causes physical education teachers seek other possibilities of body culture movement and 
the Adventure Sports and more of them. The literature review allowed us to verify that there are several actions within 
the school showing such practices but we found only a work that established cartographic similarity to our study.
We believe it is elementary to use the rules and safety procedures as a background in physical education classes in 
relation to Adventure Sports. The intention is to significantly reduce or cancel the possibility of accidents through 
safety standards and procedures calculating this risk allowing an emancipatory practice.
Lastly. It highlights the importance of research due to the opening of a niche, so they can develop new research 
that contributes to this theme.