White water adventure tourism on the Ash River, South Africa
TRACEY J. M. MCKAY
Department of Geography, Environmental Management and Energy Studies, University of 
Johannesburg, Auckland Park, Johannesburg, South Africa. E-mail: traceymc@uj.ac.za
(Received: 14 November 2013; Revision Accepted: 25 January 2014)
Abstract
Kayaking and rafting on white water is viewed as core adventure activity in both the adventure 
recreation and adventure tourism literature. Additionally, many argue that the activity also 
represents a segment of extreme or lifestyle sport. This case study of the Ash River, South Africa 
demonstrates how, with specific reference to white water kayaking and rafting, the boundaries 
between adventure recreation, adventure tourism and extreme sports are blurred. That is, the 
various white water activities mutually support one another, with guides, operators and 
participants ‘boundary hopping’ between them. The Ash River is shown to be a significant white 
water adventure site for South Africa due to its flow volumes, speed, consistency, quality of 
rapids and unsurpassed water quality. Thus, the river draws in both local and international 
tourists, for some of whom the river was ‘bucket list white water adventure site’. The result is 
that the white water adventure industry generates significant income, direct and indirect job 
opportunities, for the Bethlehem and Clarens area. The study also examined the demographic and 
socio-economic profiles of the kayaking and rafting tourists, as well as explored their motivations 
and experiences. It was found that there are some significant differences between the motivations 
and experiences of the kayakers compared to the rafters, between male and female rafters and 
between white and black rafters. Lastly, the age profile of the rafters seems to impact on what 
activities are undertaken. 
Keywords: White water rafting, kayaking, motivations, experiences, profiles, adventure.
How to cite this article:
McKay, T.J.M (2014). White water adventure tourism on the Ash River, South Africa. African 
Journal for Physical, Health Education, Recreation and Dance, 20(1), 52-75.
Introduction
Adventure tourism has a global footprint, with a significant client base, and its 
contribution to economic development is well documented (Williams & Soutar, 
2005; Buckley, 2010). White water adventure is a well known, popular, activity 
taking place in Europe, North and South America, Asia, Australia and New 
Zealand, as well as Africa (Swarbrooke, Beard, Leckie & Pomfret, 2003; 
Buckley, 2010). Although lagging the rest of the world, white water adventure 
tourism in Africa is on the rise. For example, some 12 000 people raft the Upper 
Nile, Uganda annually (Morgan et al., 2010). Compared to the rest of Africa, 
however, South Africa is an adventure tourism behemoth, partly because South 
Africa boasts a physical geography that lends itself to adventure tourism but also 
because there is a significant domestic adventure tourism base (Rogerson & 
White water adventure tourism 53
Visser, 2004; Rogerson & Lisa, 2005; Rogerson, 2007). White water rafting is a 
significant segment of the South African adventure tourism industry (Greffrath 
& Roux, 2012). This study explores the white water adventure sector by 
conducting an in-depth examination of white water kayaking and rafting tourism 
on the Ash River, in the Eastern Free State. The demographic and socioeconomic profile of the tourists is given and their motivations and experiences 
are explored. The study is structured as follows: A brief overview is given as to 
what adventure, adventure recreation, adventure tourism and lifestyle sports are. 
The focus turns to explore in more depth some of the key themes in the 
international adventure literature. The methodology and description of the study 
area is then presented, followed by the findings and discussion. 
The adventure leisure market
While most agree that the defining feature of adventure is that of risk, there is 
little agreement as to what risk itself is (Kane & Zink, 2004; Buckley, 2006; 
Fletcher, 2010). Swarbrooke et al. (2003) agues that adventure is highly personal 
as different people have different notions of what is risk. Be that as it may, many 
scholars argue that adventure is associated with physical risk. That is, an activity 
is ‘adventurous’ and ‘challenging’ if there is a risk to life and/or limb, although 
there is a critique that this notion is overly masculine, and that for women, 
adventure has a social meaning (Little, 2002 a&b; Ewert, Gilbertson, Luo & 
Voight, 2013). That is, interpersonal relationships feature more prominently for 
women when it comes to adventure (Ryan, 2002; Ewert et al., 2013). Risk aside, 
another key defining feature of adventure is that the final outcome is unknown 
(Shepard & Evans, 2005). Furthermore, Cloke and Perkins (1998) and Varley 
(2006) argue that active participation is an essential feature of adventure and 
usually strong emotional responses are triggered. Thus, adventure involves risk, 
uncertainty, challenge, active physical involvement and the experience of strong
emotions, such as fear and excitement. 
Experiencing or undertaking an adventure has become associated with travel and 
leisure. Thus, there is considerable debate concerning what constitutes adventure 
recreation travel vis-à-vis adventure tourism. Galloway (2006), Hardiman and 
Burgin (2011) and Tsaur, Lin and Liu (2013a) define adventure recreation as an 
outdoor activity where an individual purposely takes on the challenge of 
engaging with uncontrollable natural hazards (either nature itself or a physical 
feature) in order to apply their specialised skills and/or equipment to overcome 
the task at hand. Adventure recreation is, thus, a personal adventure where all 
risk is borne by the individual. Adventure tourism is somewhat different as much 
of the risk (and, thus, challenge) is borne either by the operator and/or the guides, 
as the onus rests with the service provider to ensure clients have a safe, fun 
experience. Buckley (2000) notes that often the only skilled, knowledgeable and 
physically fit people involved in the activity are the paid guides. In the case of 
54 McKay
adventure tourism, then, people pay for an organised, commericalised adventure 
tour. As such, adventure tourism represents the commericalisation of adventure 
recreation (Buckley, 2007). 
In order to gain greater understanding of the adventure industry, and as a 
response to its size and complexity, adventure activities are classified into three 
key segments: hard, soft and nature-based adventure (Buckley, 2006; McKay, 
2013). All can manifest as either adventure recreation and/or adventure tourism. 
Although, due to the high cost of equipment, or the levels of specialised skills 
and experience required, some adventure activities are less likely to be part of the 
adventure recreation market. Nature-based adventure, for example, which 
involves physical interaction with wild animals, such as walking with lions, is 
unlikely to be undertaken by an individual recreational adventurer (Buckley, 
2010). Importantly, the boundaries between hard and soft adventure are 
somewhat blurred. It is generally accepted that differences lie with the degree of 
physical activity, risk and skills required (Cloke & Perkins, 1998; Buckley, 
2006). Adventure is considered ‘soft’ if the risk is low, fewer skills are necessary 
and/or high levels of physical fitness are not required (Williams & Soutar, 2005). 
Adventure is ‘hard’ if the activities are more risky, more physical and more 
challenging. Both Williams and Soutar (2005) and Buckley (2006) view white 
water rafting as “archetypal” hard adventure tourism. A key feature of white 
water adventure is the categorisation of rapids. Rapids are classified according to 
the International River Classification Scale of I to V. The easiest and, thus, least 
dangerous is a Class I rapid. The most difficult are Class V and greater. 
Kayaking involves individually navigating rivers using small hard-shell boats 
using double-ended paddles. Kayakers generally seek out Class III to V rapids 
(Fiore, 2003). Rafting is a group activity where single-blade paddles and 
inflatable boats accommodating between four and eight people are used. With 
rafting, much of the propulsion and steering is done by an experienced 
individual, usually known as a river guide, who is employed by a commercial 
operator (Wilson, McDermott, Munir & Hogervorst, 2013). Most commercial 
white water rafting operators work Class I to IV rapids.
Contrary to kayaking, where an individual must be highly skilled and super fit, 
the typical white water rafter is a cash-rich, time-poor, unskilled (and often unfit) 
tourist. The operator provides all the necessary equipment and clothing (e.g. 
Personal Flotation Devices (PDFs), helmets, wetsuits and wind jackets). The trip 
has to be ultra safe, short on length and big on thrills and spills (Buckley, 2006). 
Buckley (2007) argues that white water rafting is now such a high-volume, lowdifficulty ‘packaged’ product that it bears a strong resemblance to mass tourism. 
The trips are so similar, they can usually only be distinguished in terms of trip 
duration (half day, one day, three days); type of boat; location and guide to client 
ratio (Buckley, 2006). 
White water adventure tourism 55
As a consequence, a number of scholars accuse hard adventure tourism operators 
of adventure-washing. That is, the activities are now so choreographed and
micro-managed that for all intents and purposes they are no longer adventurous 
at all (Arnould, Otnes & Price, 1999; Holyfield, 1999; Beedie & Hudson, 2003; 
Varley, 2006). Despite such perceptions, adventure tourism, although not 
inherently life threatening; is not risk free (Weber, 2001; Kane, 2010). Bentley, 
Page and Laird (2000) and Page, Bentley and Walker (2005) have demonstrated 
this empirically by investigating, and subsequently classifying, actual accidents 
in both the adventure tourism and adventure recreation sectors. They found that 
both are characterised by serious incidents [which they classified as involving 
hospitalisation for more than 48 hours and/or death] and minor incidents 
[classified as cuts, bruises and incidents that require no hospitalisation or 
hospitalisation for less than 48 hours]. Minor incidents, as a result of slips, trips 
and falls occurred more frequently than serious ones. Generally speaking 
adventure recreation is more dangerous than adventure tourism. Water-based 
commercial adventure activities are riskier than land or air based ones (Bentley, 
Page & Laird, 2001; Bentley, Page & Edwards, 2008). 
There are a number of physical risks associated with white water adventure. 
Water, especially cold water, adds a particular risk dimension, namely the 
possibility of drowning, near drowning or hyperthermia. One may also be struck 
by rock and/or a paddle, or experience sunburn (Shephard, 1987; O’Hare, 
Chalmers, Arnold & Williams, 2002; Fiore, 2003). There is also the threat of 
acquiring a serious water borne disease, such as staphylococcal skin infections; 
giardiasis; schistosomiases and leptospirosis (Gelman et al., 2002; Fiore, 2003; 
Narita, Fujitani, Haake and Paterson, 2005; Monahan, Miller and Nally, 2009; 
Morgan et al., 2010). Rafting or kayaking on rivers in Japan, Ireland, the USA, 
Brazil, Nicaragua, Ecuador, Costa Rica, Uganda and Malaysia are all known for 
such disease related risks. Generally speaking, however, fatality rates are modest 
(Fletcher, 2010). For the United States of America, Fiore (2003) estimated that 
the white water fatality rate was only 0.87 per 100 000 user days. 
In New Zealand, O’Hare et al. (2002) found only 2.5 fatalities per annum. Most 
fatalities involved either novices who found themselves in situations beyond 
their skill level or highly accomplished kayakers who sought out dangerous 
Class V or VI rapids (Fiore & Houston, 2001). In terms of injuries, kayaking is 
more risky than rafting. Fiore (2003) found kayaking injuries to be 1.9 per 1000 
user days, compared to between 0.26 to 0.44 injuries per 1000 user days for 
rafting. Researchers conclude that education (especially of kayakers), safety 
talks, PDFs, wetsuits, non-slip footwear and helmets are essential features for 
reducing risk in the white water industry (O’Hare et al., 2002; Fiore, 2003; 
Bailey, 2010). On the whole, however, driving to the river to raft or kayak is 
riskier than actually rafting or kayaking it. 
56 McKay
Importantly, some argue that with respect to white water kayaking and rafting, 
there are significant overlaps between what constitutes hard adventure and what 
constitutes active sport tourism. Hinch and Higham (2001) and Roberts (2011) 
are even of the opinion that hard adventure is extreme sport adventure tourism, 
just by another name. This narrowing of the divide between sport and tourism 
has been documented by Bourdeau, Corneloup and Mao (2004); Varley (2006), 
as well as, McGillivray and Frew (2007). These scholars argue that a 
hybridization of leisure activities occurred as sports and active holidays 
coalesced and took on new meanings and forms. Thus, voluntary active physical 
participation, normally associated with sport, began to merge with notions of 
tourism. In turn, the emphasis tourism places on consumption and 
commercialisation has became associated with sport. 
The impacts of this can be seen in the commercialised adventure leisure market 
with the emergence of extreme, adventure or lifestyle sports tourism. Kayaking 
seems to represent an example of this. Kayaking started in the 1930s as 
adventure recreation. Overtime, various equipment and rule changes occurred to 
reduce the risks and formalise it. It became a popular extreme or lifestyle sport, 
especially in Europe. By the 1990s it was granted Olympic discipline status 
(Wilson et al., 2013). Traditionally dominated by men, women were only 
recognised as fully fledged members of this community in the last decade. 
Rafting also started off as adventure recreation, and, once again, with improved 
equipment and better safety measures become very popular. However, as it is a 
group activity, and the equipment can be both cumbersome and costly, rather 
than evolving as an extreme and then Olympic sport, it become commercialised 
as adventure tourism. 
Olympic competitors aside, most kayakers and rafters have adapted the sport to 
reflect more of the values of adventure. That is, the inherently competitive nature 
of sport has changed from participants competing against each other to 
competing with oneself (Tomlinson, Ravenscroft, Wheaton & Gilchrist, 2005; 
Varley, 2006). Still, some scholars argue that individuals do compete against one 
other, albeit in a classic post modern manner. That is, in terms of accumulating 
experiences. Those with more or ‘better’ experiences accumulate social status, 
social standing, social recognition and/or enjoy greater social bonding (between 
family and/or friends) (McIntyre & Roggenbuck, 1998; Hopkinson & Pujari, 
1999; Jonas, Stewart & Larkin, 2003; Sharpe, 2005; Trauer, 2006; Berger & 
Greenspan, 2008; Ewert et al., 2013). To this end, Abramson and Laviolette 
(2007) place hard adventure tourism or extreme sport tourism as part of the 
experience economy, a key aspect of which is performance. In the experience 
economy, the paying client becomes an entertainment product (Hopkinson & 
Pujari, 1999; Bell & Lyall, 2002). That is, a defining feature of extreme lifestyle 
sport or hard adventure is performance - either as a group, and/or in front of an 
audience. Using social media tools, such as Facebook, Twitter or YouTube this 
White water adventure tourism 57
audience can even be a virtual one (Bell & Lyall, 2002; Kane & Tucker, 2004; 
Cater, 2007; Bott, 2009). 
Who seeks out adventure and why?
Many investigations have been undertaken to ascertain who purchases an 
adventure tour and why (Jonas et al., 2003; Kane & Tucker, 2004; Allman, 
Mittelstaedt, Martin & Goldenberg, 2009; Sirgy, 2010). Part of the analysis 
includes establishing what their socio-economic and demographic profile is, 
what rationales are driving their purchases and what experiences they have.
Generally speaking, the typical white water adventurer is well educated and 
middle class (Kuentzel & Heberlein, 1997; Buckley, 2000; Beedie & Hudson, 
2003; Sharpe, 2005; Fletcher, 2010). Most are aged between 30 and 40, with few 
travelling with small children (Fletcher, 2010). Sung (2004), therefore, argues 
that life stage strongly influences the demographic profile. In general, young 
male participants dominate (Swarbrooke et al, 2003; Sharpe, 2005; Tomlinson et 
al, 2005). Whilst this preponderance of males typifies white water kayaking, it is 
not so for rafting, where there is a better balance between male and female 
participation (Fiore, 2003; Fletcher, 2010; Roberts, 2011; Ewert et al., 2013). 
Little (2002b) argues that the social construction of femininity is the root cause 
of poor female participation. That is, women are socialised into being passive, 
nurturing and focused on others rather than self. As a girl child grows, they are 
usually exposed to less ‘adventure’ than a boy child and as a consequence adult 
women have less adventure experience and skills compared to men. 
Furthermore, women seem to have a higher internal ‘risk barrier’ and anticipate 
failure more often than men. Thus, women have many hurdles to overcome 
before embarking on an adventure activity, made worse by the fact that there are 
few female adventure role models or ‘heroines’ that can be drawn upon. Lastly, 
as adventure is male dominated, ‘adventure space’ is ‘male space’, where male 
culture prevails, a situation the media reinforces. As women feel awkward and 
unwelcome in such spaces this further inhibits participation. 
Participation seems to be racially skewed, with white people predominating 
(Kearsley, 1993; Beedie & Hudson, 2003; Fiore, 2003; Sharpe, 2005; Fletcher, 
2010). Why black Americans are significantly underrepresented in outdoor 
adventure has been explored by both Martin (2004) and Mowatt (2009). They 
propose a number of reasons: It could be affordability, that is black Americans 
are generally poorer than white Americans. Or it could be that black Americans 
are socialised differently. That is, black people view themselves as cosmopolitan 
and sophisticated so they do not ‘rough-it’ in the outdoors. More likely, however, 
is that a racialised outdoor identity exists. That is, ‘adventurers’ are defined as 
being white, not black. Outdoor leisure space is ‘white space’. The media, 
including advertising brochures and images produced by the adventure tour 
operators themselves, reinforce this image, as black people are seldom portrayed 
58 McKay
as participants. Thus, black people may shun adventure activities out of fear of 
racial discrimination, fear of being ‘othered’, fear of feeling ‘out of place’ or 
generally experience a feeling of being ‘unwelcome’. 
The literature then moves on to examine what motivates the typical adventure 
tourist. A number of international scholars argue that adventure tourists are 
typical ‘sensation seekers’ (Litvin, 2008; Sirgy, 2010). Such individuals 
participate in adventure tourism either as an escape from their mundane daily 
routines, for fun or for enjoyment (Todd, Anderson, Anderson and Anderson, 
2002; Morrissey, 2008). They crave the adrenalin ‘high’ or ‘rush’ which ensues 
due to the production of adrenalin, norepinephrine and dopamine that 
participation in adventure activities, causes (Morgan, Moore & Mansell, 2005; 
Buckley, 2006). Litvin (2008) and Tok (2011) argue that this sensation seeking 
behavior is a personality trait. That is, some people are ‘hard wired’ to actively 
seek out physical and or other types of risk to sate their cravings for high sensory 
stimulation (thrills). These individuals thrive on varied, novel and intense 
sensory stimulation. They embrace adventure due to naturally high levels of self 
confidence and lower likelihood of focusing on possible negative outcomes 
(Murray, 2003). 
Galloway (2006), Fletcher (2010) and Ewert et al. (2013) see things differently, 
maintaining that people who engage in adventure tourism do so because they are 
‘Edgeworkers’. That is, adventure tourism opens up a space for people to 
negotiate the ‘edge’ or boundary between life and death, chaos and order, control 
and uncertainty (Varley, 2006). In this framework, adventure tourism allows the 
participant to safely ‘explore’ death, pushing oneself to the edge of life, and, 
thus, creating experiences that give new meaning to one’s life (Schneider, 
Butryn, Furst and Masucci, 2007; Morrissey, 2008). Thus, Galloway (2006) 
views adventure tourism or extreme sports as a form of positive deviant leisure 
behaviour, Morrissey (2008) concurs, arguing that all humans have a deep need 
to explore ‘the edge’ and that often adventure tourism is the only place where 
modern society allows this to occur. However, constantly and voluntarily taking 
physical risks is generally viewed as deviant behaviour, especially as Lyng 
(2005) found edgework to be highly addictive, attracting people seeking hedonic 
pleasure and instant gratification (Galloway, 2006; Schneider et al., 2007). 
But not all adventurers participate for the risk, thrill or ‘high’ but rather for the 
challenge (Bunting, 2000; Gyimóthy & Mykletun, 2004; Tsaur et al., 2013; 
Tsaur, Yen & Hsiao 2013). That is, adventure offers an opportunity to challenge 
one’s physical and/or mental limits. Successful completion of a challenge gives a 
sense of deep personal satisfaction and accomplishment. Both the physical and 
psychological challenges presented by adventure can boost self confidence, 
increase problem solving skills and foster better interpersonal skills. Gyimóthy 
and Mykletun (2004) and Kane and Tucker (2004) call this approach to 
White water adventure tourism 59
adventure tourism ‘deep play’. In order to meet the challenge the individual has 
to become deeply immersed in the activity, and its alternative reality of unique 
expectations, rules and values, are such that the demands of everyday life are 
temporarily forgotten. In the ‘safe space’ of the adventure tourism industry, 
therefore, adults can ‘let their hair down’, ‘experience a challenge’ in a 
controlled ‘playful’ manner. Within this context, the adventurer has to repeat the 
activity regularly if skills and experience is to be acquired. Whilst becoming 
proficient, the participant takes on a new identity and begins to associate who 
they are with the activity (Jonas et al 2003; Trauer 2006; Berger & Greenspan, 
2008).
Jones, Hollenhorst, Perna and Selin (2000) and Mackenzie, Hodge and Boyes 
(2011) argue when a physical adventurous activity is challenging participants 
may experience a state of FLOW. Some scholars, such as Walle (1997), 
Boniface (2000), as well as Brymer and Oades (2009) drawing on the work of 
Maslow, have gone on to describe the experience of FLOW within adventure as 
‘peak experience’ or ‘peak adventure’. FLOW is a heightened state of bliss that 
occurs when a person is completely immersed in a challenging activity such that 
action and awareness merges, time appears to slow down or stand still, selfconscious awareness is lost and movement and sensations become ‘blended’ or 
flow into one (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990; Ryan, 2002). During this state, the person 
becomes mentally detached from material reality and all aspects of ‘normal life’ 
fade from consciousness (Wu & Liang, 2011). Thus, FLOW is an inherently 
autotelic, exceptionally pleasant, experience (Jones et al., 2000; Mackenzie et al., 
2013). FLOW experiences, whilst fleeting, often have a lasting impact, giving an 
individual who has experienced it a deep sense of personal happiness and an 
impression that their quality of life has improved (Swarbrooke et al., 2003). For 
some, achieving this state can profoundly influence both ones perception of self 
and one’s views on one’s purpose in life (Rowan, 1999; Elsrud, 2001; Weber, 
2001; Kane & Zink, 2004; Pomfret, 2006; Willig, 2008; Brymer & Oades, 2009). 
This then opens up the possibility that participation in adventure activities can 
result in an experience of transcendence, enlightenment and may even have a 
spiritual dimension (Sanford, 2007; Schmidt & Little, 2007). 
Willig (2008) described transcendence as one where neither the past, nor the 
future matter. An individual becomes completing immersed in ‘the now’. One’s 
focus is only on living and enjoying the present, one moment at a time. This is 
best thought of as living in the present, not living for the present, a condition 
most sensation seekers, operating in a paratelic state, are in. Walle (1997), 
drawing on the work of Emerson, Muir and Thoreau suggests that people pursue 
adventure, because the risks, challenges and the associated fears, offer the 
possibility of gaining personal insight and self-actualisation. As Jonas et al. 
(2003) notes, one has to overcome fear to know oneself. Furthermore, living in 
the present moment, is a type of ‘meditative state’, a condition many find to be 
60 McKay
stress releasing and therapeutic. In this realm of transcendence, the possibility 
opens up of establishing a deep relationship with themselves, with others or even 
with God. If such a state is achieved through participation in adventure, it may 
be possible to argue that adventure contributes to physical, psychological and 
spiritual wellbeing (Ryckman et al., 1985; Brymer & Oades, 2009). 
Todd et al. (2002) posits however, that it is far more common to find that 
veterans, as opposed to beginners or sporadic/occasional adventurers, participate 
for the intrinsic reasons associated with challenge, FLOW, transcendence and 
enlightenment. Drawing on Bryon’s theory of specialisation and the notion of a 
travel career ladder, a number of scholars agree (Richards, 1996; Swarbrooke et 
al., 2003). Kuentzel and Heberlein (1997) propose that there is a linear process, 
from novice to expert, associated with individual self-development. As one 
moves along this continuum, one develops a cognitive and emotional attachment 
to the activity, partly because of the extensive commitment of time and resources 
required to achieve ‘expert’ status. Eventually, the activity becomes central to 
the individual’s lifestyle, identity and notions of self-worth. Finally, the person 
starts to ‘live’ within the sub-world or sub-culture of the activity, that is, the 
activity becomes an important frame of reference for the individual. Such deep 
immersion into an activity’s subculture, the need to persevere, acquire skills and 
specialised knowledge, along with the manifestation of durable benefits such as 
self-actualisation and the creation of a new personal identity is what Stebbins 
(1992; 1997) defines as serious leisure (Tomlinson et al., 2005; Pomfret, 2011). 
So, there is the possibility that for some, the adventure activity is a manifestation 
of a serious leisure career. 
The literature lacks clarity, however, if a serious leisure career can emerge out of 
commodified adventure rather than out of adventure recreation. While Buckley 
(2007) is of the opinion that hard adventure could be a type of serious leisure, 
Cloke and Perkins (1998) note that many participants are only ‘occasional 
adventurers’ who select to participate if they find the destination has service 
providers that offer it, making it unlikely that adventure tourism will 
automatically result in serious leisure formation. 
Methodology
In order to establish the demographic, geographical and socio-economic profile 
of the tourists to the Ash River is, as well as, determine what is attracting them to 
the Ash River, 114 semi-structured participant questionnaires, using convenience 
sampling, were collected on site between September 2012 and January 2013. To 
reduce response bias, some questions were asked in the third person (Kerlinger 
& Lee, 1999; Malhotra & Birks, 2007). Where possible, the key or main decision 
maker in the group was interviewed. Additional data was collected, using semistructured in-depth interviews, with the owners and staff of the rafting 
White water adventure tourism 61
companies, as well as with two South African Olympian kayakers, other 
members of the kayaking community, and local Dihlabeng councilors. Informed 
consent was obtained and participation was voluntary. Participant observation 
also took place. The refusal rate was low. A shortcoming is that only a few 
rafters, especially the domestic tourists, could adequately recall exactly how 
much money they had spent on ‘meals’ and ‘other’. Thus, responses for these 
questions are limited. Furthermore, participants did not always differentiate 
between the purchase of ‘casual snacks’, drinks and sit down meals. Lastly, not 
all rafting groups kept track of who in the group made purchases under the 
category ‘other’. Often they did not know (or elected not to ask) what each other 
had spent on these items. Thus, actual spending patterns may be significantly 
higher than what is reported here.
The study area: Ash River, Eastern Free State
Physically, the Eastern Free State lends itself to tourism. The landscape is 
picturesque, with soaring sandstone mountains, Poplar trees, wild grasses and 
cultivated farms. Climatologically, the area experiences hot, rainy summers and 
cold winters, with occasional snow. Most days are sunny with clear blue skies. 
The Golden Gate National Park is a significant tourist attraction in its own right 
(see Figure 1). The Ash River has been significantly transformed by its use as an 
outlet for water coming into South Africa from the Lesotho Highlands Water 
Project (LHWP). This transformation enabled the creation of a white water 
rafting and kayaking industry in the area. Two rafting companies, with 13 
permanent and 12 temporary employees in total, work the river. Several South 
African Olympic kayakers, South African champions, international kayakers 
[from Germany, Slovenia, Slovakia and France] train on the Ash. The 
internationals usually stay for at least a month and many bring family, coaches, 
medical staff and other kayaking related staff with them. For example, in 2012, 
some 16 French and 74 Germans kayakers stayed in the area to train on the river. 
In January 2013, alone, five slalom kayakers came from the Czech Republic to 
train and compete and one from France. It is also the site of an in–school youth 
kayaking development programme. Initially launched in 2008/9 by a Dutch nonprofit organization, The Prince Claus Fund, with a donation of R250 000, it is 
now sponsored by the local municipality and serves as a job creation project for 
the SA Olympians (CSA, pers comm, 7 July 2008). The youth development 
scheme has been successful, producing a number of representatives for South 
Africa at international junior and senior kayaking events. It seems that, as for 
Queenstown, New Zealand, the location has a similar potential to become an 
adventure tourism ‘mecca’ or rural playground for well heeled adventure 
tourists. The tourism industry in the area is well developed, with bars, 
restaurants, coffee shops, upmarket shops, art galleries, artisanal crafters and a 
huge range of accommodation options. It is well positioned with respect to 
62 McKay
domestic tourist source markets and is a popular second home destination 
(Hoogendoorn & Visser, 2004). Current efforts by the Dihlabeng Municipality, 
SanParks and local tourist enterprises to promote tourism, using Facebook [e.g. I 
Love Free State] and Twitter [e.g. @Clarensevents], as well as, participating in 
adventure/tourism shows and festivals, perhaps reflects the desire of locals to 
learn from – and perhaps copy - the New Zealand experience. For example, the 
local municipality actively markets the river as a kayaking site, such as 
designating the first African Slalom Competition (2013) as mayoral event, in 
order to encourage the use of the river for international kayaking competitions. 
Unfortunately, the Ash River is also one of the few rivers in South Africa that is 
suitable for small scale hydroelectric power generation (McKay, 2013). To date, 
one mini-HEP scheme has destroyed the Ash’s Class V rapid, forcing the rafting 
industry to offer only half day trips. Another planned mini-HEP now threatens 
the slalom kayaking rapid, although South African authorities have insisted that 
the HEP company replace the rapid with an artificial slalom course, built to 
international standards. It remains to be seen if this does indeed occur and if an 
artificial course is sufficient to maintain all aspects of the local kayaking and 
rafting industry. 
When viewed in terms of Buckley’s (2010) ‘hierarchy of desire’ concept for 
adventure sites, the Ash River is fashionable white water, and as close to extreme 
as one can get, without being all out dangerous. Typical of all kayaking and 
white river rafting rivers, the Ash River has a number of ‘classic’ Grade III - V
rapids. As is the usual practice in the white water community, these rapids have 
names. The rapids in downstream order, are: ‘breathalyzer’; ‘carwash’; ‘allesverloren’; ‘alles- gevonden’, ‘fishpond’, ‘long drop’ and ‘big surprise’. These 
names reflect the local cultural heritage and the white water experience. The 
permanent kayak course follows the ‘alles-verloren’ rapid and this rapid is a 
valuable slalom kayaking resource. The water flow varies between 15m3 and 
35m3
per second, gradient is roughly 5m/km and the white water course is about 
10kms long, or between 2 and 3 hours in a raft. The river does present some 
hazards, namely cold water (around 120C); weirs, trees branches, collapsing river 
banks and slalom gates. The elevation (1818m asl), clean, swift flowing, regular 
and disease free flow of the Ash River, along with good quality rapids makes it 
an attractive location for white water kayakers and rafters. All (100%) of the 
kayakers rated the following as important for attracting them to the river: Clean, 
safe water and good weather. Many (92%) also said the quality of the rapids; the 
friendly community (83%), training at altitude (83%) and value for money (67%) 
were attractive features of the Ash River. 
White water adventure tourism 63
Figure 1: Clarens, the Ash River and the Eastern Free State
While all kayakers said guaranteed water was important, this aspect is, perhaps, 
the river’s most serious problem. As it relies on the LHWP, if the LHWP 
engineers shut the pumps, for maintenance, for example, the water stops flowing. 
As this happens often, sometimes without due warning and can, at times, last for 
weeks, it is a serious hindrance to fostering kayaking and rafting tourism. 
Findings
The typical kayak tourist can be described as male, single, white and South 
African of moderate means (Table 1). All had travelled to the Ash River with the 
specific purpose of kayaking. Despite perceptions that this extreme sport is for 
young people only, the age ranged from under 20 to over 50, although this can be 
attributed to the range of accompanying persons, who were travelling as coaches, 
judges or event organisers. Generally, most kayakers travelled in a group of 
more than three people (82%), with 27.3% of the tourists being children. Few 
travelled alone (8%), rather they came with friends (33%), family (50%) or on an 
organised tour (8%). The majority (42%) resided in Kwa-Zulu Natal (Durban; 
64 McKay
Howick); followed by 33% who lived in the Free State (Vaal; Parys). The rest 
were internationals, hailing from the Czech Republic or France. Only one was 
from Gauteng. On the whole, the older kayaking tourists were more educated, 
while the younger participants were enrolled at an educational institution. Of 
those were employed full time, most were adventure tour guides or involved in 
kayaking as a coach or secretary of the local kayaking federation. 
Table 1: Socio-economic and demographic profile, Slalom kayakers, river rafters (in 
percentages)
Age <20 21-25 26-30 31-35 36-50 50+
Kayakers 25 8 17 0 17 33
Rafters 6 15 15 17 32 15
Gender Male Female
Kayakers 83 16
Rafters 56 44
Marital 
Status
Single/widowed/divorced Co-habiting Married
Kayakers 59 8 33
Rafters 28 13 59
Race White Black/Indian/other 
Kayakers 83 17
Rafters 92 8
Nationality South African International
Kayakers 83 17
Rafters 91 9
Education 
levels
In high 
school/finished 
high school
Some post 
school 
education
Diploma /Degree Degree/Post graduate 
degree
Kayakers 50 8 17 25
Rafters 26 5 16 53
Income <R5000 R 5001-
R10 000
R10 001-
R15 000
R15 001-
R20 000
R20 001-
R30 000
R30 001+
Kayakers 36 27 9 9 0 19
Rafters 13 14 9 12 16 36
The kayakers can be described as extremely dedicated, with 82% claiming to 
have travelled to other places within South Africa to kayak. These destinations 
included: the Umkomaas River; the Berg River; the Great Fish River; the Orange 
River; the Vaal River; the Sabie River and the Blyde River. Unsurprisingly all 
but two described themselves as being ‘addicted’ to kayaking. Overall, 42% said 
they did it for the ‘adrenalin’, the ‘rush’ or the ‘thrill’, saying things like “high 
adrenalin”, “exhilaration” and “not boring at all!” to describe their views. 
Some 8 % did it for ‘fun’: “Fun! I like to paddle for fun and go fast”. Another
17% said they did it for the ‘experience’ which included “experiencing the 
river’s power” and an additional 8% did it to learn new skills. An additional 8% 
said they did it for the love of the activity “I love shooting rapids” and some 
17% claimed kayaking to be ‘their life’ or ‘career’. Their enthusiasm for all 
White water adventure tourism 65
things adventure and physical manifested in the other activities the kayakers 
either had done or planned to do whilst at the Ash River. These included hiking 
(21%), mountain biking (14%) and white water rafting (14%), as well as walking 
(7%) and going to gym (7%). Thus, these tourists are both typical ‘adrenalin 
junkies’, seeking out thrills that involve physical risk – “I enjoy being scared 
witless” said one – “it feels good to go down the big rapids, the speed…I can’t 
describe it” – said another - but most also displayed the characteristics of a 
serious leisure tourist. For example, some had a more profound or deeper 
experience associated with FLOW and transcendence. This they described in 
words, such as being “at one with nature” and feeling a sense of belonging 
saying they felt “at home”; “at one with the river” and that they were “in the 
right place”. Which may be interpreted as a manifestation of ‘immersion in the 
moment’ where an individual feels ‘at one’ with their physical surroundings and 
a type of self actualisation is experienced. Another individual described 
experiencing “a whole range of emotions: nervous, anger, joy, being in control, 
being out of control”.
There were commonalities, between the kayakers and the rafters, especially in 
terms of race (the majority of rafters and kayakers were white) and nationality 
(most were domestic tourists). Another significant commonality was that most 
participants had post secondary qualifications, some 42% for the kayakers and 
69% for the rafters. Most without post school qualifications were currently 
enrolled at a tertiary institution. As for the kayakers, most rafters travelled in a 
group. Only a handful travelled alone (2%), most came with friends (33%), 
family (64%) or on an organised tour (1%). Again, as for the kayakers, some of 
the rafters (9%) were long haul internationals. Some rafters hailed from France, 
Germany, Canada, the United Kingdom, Mexico and Ireland, whilst two percent 
were residents of SADC states. Similar to the kayakers, some 36% of the rafters 
had taken or planned to take other adventure tours such as quad biking, horse 
riding, MTB and ziplining. 
The typical rafting tourist however was significantly different to the typical 
kayaker. Firstly, the gender ratio is different with 44% of the rafters being 
female, compared to only 16% of the kayakers. Marital status was also different, 
with 59% of the rafters married compared to 33% of the kayakers, which may be 
accounted for by the difference in gender and age mix between the two groups. 
In general, due to higher levels of education, joint family incomes and more 
years of work experience, the rafters earned significantly more than the kayakers. 
The typical kayaker earned less than R10 000 per month, whereas the typical 
rafter earned over R20 000 per month. Linked to income was occupation. A large 
number of rafters were employed as professionals (37%), such as attorneys, 
accountants, engineers and medical professionals, whilst some 38% were either 
managers or owned their own businesses. Unlike the kayakers who all stayed at 
least one night, some 16% of the rafters were day trippers, most of whom were 
66 McKay
from Bethlehem or Bloemfontein. The majority (43%) resided in Gauteng 
(Johannesburg and Pretoria mainly); followed by 26% who lived in the Free 
State (Bethlehem and Bloemfontein in the main). The rest of the rafters were 
made up of tourists from KZN (7%); the Western Cape (4%) with a few from 
Limpopo, Mpumalanga, the Northern Cape and the Eastern Cape. The 
differences in income and occupation could partly explain why the rafters spent 
more money in the area (Table 2). However, as the kayakers generally came 
from afar, their higher travel costs could have reduced their spending money. As 
the local government was sponsoring the kayaking competition to promote 
tourism, there were no entry fees, this further reduced their spending. Lastly, as 
the kayakers stayed in the area for longer periods of time, they were able to 
negotiate better accommodation deals. 
Table 2: Tourist spending patterns, per travel group
Average spend Kayakers Rafters
Fees Free entry R1 977.93
Meals R2 885.25 R1 541.85
Travelling R8 083.75 R1 337.06
Other R 179.17 R 926.52
Accommodation R5 097.00 R5 786.37
Average in total R16 245.17 R7 610.47
Average spend excluding accommodation R11 148.17 R 1 824.10
Average spend excluding travel R 8 161.42 R 6 273.41
Average less accommodation & travel R 3 064.42 R4 449.31
Note: Some internationals paid for accommodation that included three meals a day. Many 
domestic tourists opted for self catering which significantly reduced meal costs. 
Some 21% of rafters said they were only moderately dedicated to adventure 
activities and 4% agreed that they were not dedicated at all. Overall, 30% of the 
rafters described themselves as ‘addicted’ adventurers, with another 30% 
describing themselves as ‘extremely dedicated’ to adventure. Thus, it could be 
said that rafters are far less adventurous than the kayakers. Still, some 22% said 
they came to Clarens with the specific purpose of white water rafting and 14% 
had rafted elsewhere. Many had travelled far and wide to white water raft. This 
included the Zambezi River (21%); various other South African rivers (21%), the 
Sabie River (17%); the Blue Nile (7%) and other rivers across the world, such as 
Switzerland, Korea and Chile. Furthermore, some 10% listed the Ash River as 
their bucket list white water rafting site - and all of these individuals had made 
the trip to the Ash specifically to raft it. Thus, albeit less dedicated to adventure 
than the kayakers, they still displayed some of the characteristics of an addicted 
or dedicated adventure tourist. In general, however, many more rafters, unlike 
the kayakers, were occasional adventurers, who took up the opportunity to white 
water raft because it was available. This is reflected in the data where some 78% 
had not rafted anywhere else in South Africa in the 12 months preceeding this 
raft trip down the Ash. Some 86% were rafting for the first time. Despite this, the 
White water adventure tourism 67
rafters were supportive of the adventure tourism industry as a whole. Most of the 
rafters had a ‘bucket list’ of rafting locations, top of which was the Zambezi 
(67%), followed by the Orange River (14%) and then various rivers in the USA 
(11%) and New Zealand (4%) as well as the Vaal River (4%). The long and 
varied list of bucket list sites demonstrates a high level of awareness pertaining 
to the geographical location and iconic status of white water adventure. 
In terms of why they went rafting, there were again, differences and similiarites 
between the kayakers and the rafters. On the whole, only a minority of kayakers 
said they did it for fun, and none said it was an adventure for them. In contrast, 
the majority of rafters did it for fun and adventure. There was a significant 
gender difference in this. Most women rafters said they went rafting for ‘an 
adventure’ [n=16 p=0.013], where as most men said they did it for ‘fun’ [n=36 
p=0.019]. In terms of factor analysis, two key factors emerge: That an older male 
dominated group rafted for sensation seeking reasons, such as ticking off their 
bucket lists [z=0.322] and another group, dominated by younger women, did it 
for adventure [z=0.247] with p <0.05 for both. Overall, the women who elect to 
go rafting are also more likely to go MTB [n=7 p=0.01], quad biking, paint ball 
and walking [z=0.19 p<0.05]. Generally speaking, the women were more also 
likely to report that they had gone shopping. Attracting female tourists, is then, 
important to strengthen the economic multipliers associated with tourism. 
There were also gender differences in terms of what the rafters said they 
experienced on the river. In general, women (28% vs 22% for men) were more 
likely to find the water cold and more likely to say they had fun (36% vs 20% for 
men) – it was ‘fun fun fun’ said one lady and ‘flipping lekker’ said another. Only 
the women recognised how much of the rafting ‘work’ was done by the guides, 
with one even saying she ‘didn’t have to paddle much’. Men (27% vs 22% for 
women) were more likely to experience rafting as thrilling, as an adrenalin rush 
and as exciting - ‘awesome, exhilarating’ said one man. Men were also more 
likely to notice the natural setting and comment on the beauty of the river and its
surroundings (13% vs 6% for women). Overall, some 38% of men and 33% of 
women said it was a ‘good, very good, great, fabulous, awesome, phenomenal, 
brilliant, superb, wonderful, and terrific’ experience. Otherwise, there were no 
discernible gender differences in terms of finding rafting difficult, scary or 
challenging. Only a handful experienced social bonding, with no difference 
between males and females, in contrast to the literature. Very few rafters said 
they had a deeper experience akin to FLOW or transcendence. For those who 
did, however, they said they experienced ‘nothingness’, ‘freedom’, ‘pushed their 
boundaries’, ‘harmony’ and ‘oneness with Nature’. 
The study also found significant differences by race. Overall, as for the USA, 
black people are significantly underrepresented in white water adventure 
tourism. Much of this may be attributed affordability issues, as the black South 
68 McKay
African middle class is still relatively small. The black people who went rafting 
also went horse riding, abseiling and quad biking [z=0.85 p <0.05; n=4 p=0.01, 
respectively] mean this group of black rafters are adventurers, and when asked, 
all said they were either ‘addicted’ or ‘extremely dedicated’ to adventure. 
However, when asked why they thought other black people did not go white 
water rafting, a number cited fear of water e.g. ‘people think its dangerous’ and 
‘fear of the water and drowning’. Some noted a lack of proficiency in the water 
‘people can’t swim or weak swimmers’. Others claimed that it is not well 
marketed to black people e.g. ‘people don’t know about it’ and one said that 
there was a socialised view that black people ‘were not outdoor people’. Thus, 
there is a strong possibility that socialisation issues are one of the reasons behind 
low levels of black participation. But as all the black rafters avoided shopping 
and eating out [z=0.85 p <0.05], despite all being highly educated and reporting 
incomes above R20 000 per month, it may be that the locality is suffering from 
‘white space’ syndrome. That is, the locality is viewed as ‘white space’ where 
black people feel unwelcome, out of place and generally experience cultural 
dissonance. 
Clearly there are significant synergies between kayaking and rafting. Kayakers 
and rafters appear to ‘boundary hop’ between adventure recreation, adventure 
tourism and extreme sport. So, kayakers, due to the skills, experience and 
physical fitness required, often earn an income working as river guides and/or 
safety kayakers for the rafting industry. This was true even for the Olympic 
kayakers living in the area. The rafting company staff supported the kayakers in 
their extreme sport endeavours, by providing logistical support during 
competitions, by working as rescue kayakers, as well as, by helping to set up and 
maintain the slalom course. Many of the kayakers and their accompanying 
persons supported the white water rafting industry by purchasing a white water 
rafting trip. One of the kayaking accompanying persons even owned a rafting 
company. Furthermore, during the out-of-competition season, many kayakers 
became dedicated adventure recreational travellers, travelled far and wide to 
practice on different rivers. Lastly, most kayakers were first introduced to white 
water through rafting. 
Conclusion
In general, white water adventure appeals to well educated, wealthy people, 
across all age groups. Young, single people and families with children in high 
school and/or tertiary education are most likely to participate, making white 
water adventure a group activity. The industry is mainly supported by local white 
tourists. Thus, much of this study confirms the international experience in terms 
of the demographic and socio-economic profiles of the white water adventurers. 
Rafting seems to have a broader appeal than kayaking, attracting sensation 
seekers, adventurers and those who want to have fun. Kayaking has significant 
White water adventure tourism 69
potential to evolve as a serious leisure activity, due to the much higher level of 
skills and fitness required. Both activities offer the participant intangible 
benefits, such as stress relief, enjoyment and the chance to experience FLOW 
and/or transcendence. Overall, the Ash River is an extremely attractive white 
water adventure site, with a great deal of growth potential. The river attracts 
local and international tourists, to the benefit of the local economy. Kayaking 
holds the potential to contribute substantially to adventure tourism due to the 
links between it and the rafting industry as a whole. Growth inhibitors include 
the skewed gender ratio for kayaking and race ratio for rafting, as well as, the 
possibility of losing the river to HEP. It is suggested that rafting tourism be 
promoted through a national wide initiative to help black people overcome their 
fear of water. Lastly, the promotion of water rafting needs to be in conjunction 
with the promotion of white water kayaking, as they two mutually support one 
another. 
Acknowledgements 
Thanks to Clarens Xtreme, Outrageous Adventures, South Africa’s Olympic 
kayakers, the South African kayaking community, local councillors and the 
white water rafters and river guides who participated in this study. Thanks too to 
Wendy Job for the map, the UJ library, Statkon and Kerry Chipp for the data 
capturing and assistance with the statistical analysis, as well as the critical 
reviewers. 