Inclusive adapted sport and adventure training programme in the PTSD
recovery of military personnel: A creative non-fiction
Suzanne Peacocka,∗
, David Carlessb
, Jim McKennac
a Leeds Beckett University, Fairfax 103, Headingley Campus, Leeds, LS6 3QS, United Kingdom
b Leeds Beckett University, Fairfax 226, Headingley Campus, Leeds, LS6 3QS, United Kingdom
c
Leeds Beckett University, Fairfax 201, Headingley Campus, Leeds, LS6 3QS, United Kingdom
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Storytelling
Creative non-fiction
Military
Recovery
Sport
Adventure
ABSTRACT
Objectives: The purpose of this paper was to use a storytelling approach to explore the role of a 5-day inclusive
residential adapted sport and adventurous training (AS & AAT) programme in the recovery of military personnel
diagnosed with PTSD. Design: Narrative storytelling approach.
Method: A first-person story was developed from the participant's own words taken verbatim from an in-depth
semi-structured interview. A series of focus groups were conducted with members of the general public (n = 20)
to reflect upon the story.
Results: The story provides a rich and holistic account of the participant's experiences and unique insight to the
complex interaction between the social and psychological factors associated with illness and recovery. The story
also highlights the value attributed to the AS & AAT in an individual's recovery journey.
Conclusions: This paper offers important insights into the personal meaning and value of participation in a
bespoke 5-day AS & AAT programme. Feedback from the participant and focus groups with members of the
general public who engaged with the story suggest judgement criteria appropriate for a creative non-fiction
representation were achieved.
1. Introduction
Deployment to a war zone repeatedly places military personnel in
highly stressful and hostile situations, which can expose them to violent
combat experiences (Fear, Jones, Murphy et al., 2010; Hoge et al.,
2004; Hotopf et al., 2006). As a result, many personnel are returning
home to face severe and enduring psychological consequences. Since
2008, the rate of new episodes of mental health disorders among UK
military personnel has almost doubled, with more than 23,500 personnel being diagnosed with a mental health disorder since 2007 (The
Defence Analytical Militarys and Advice [DASA], 2014). Further, with a
UK military population of more than 150,000 (and an even larger veteran population) (MOD, 2014), the 4% prevalence rate of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and 20% rate of common mental health
disorders (Fear et al., 2010; Hotopf et al., 2006), mean there are currently thousands of individuals with mental health problems.
Though there are significant numbers of military personnel undergoing recovery, there is often tension regarding the definition of recovery within the mental health literature. On the one hand, recovery
can be viewed as an outcome (Onken, Craig, Ridgway, Ralph, & Cook,
2007) or medical/psychosocial concept, with individuals returning to
one's normal self following illness (Piat et al., 2009). On the other hand,
recovery can be viewed as process of self-determined transformation
whereby the individual takes charge of their life and evolves towards a
new self (Piat et al., 2009).
Mental health care within the Armed Forces is predominantly underpinned by the medical model (perceiving recovery to be a return to
the one's normal self) and primarily reliant on pharmacological and
psychological interventions (National Institute for Clinical Excellence,
2005; Tanielian & Jaycox, 2008; Foa, Keane, Friedman, & Cohen, 2009;
Rauch, Eftekhari, & Ruzek, 2012; Puetz, Youngstedt, & Herring, 2015).
Although enhancing psychological functioning and reducing symptomology is important and necessary, medical approaches have been
criticised for failing to offer a holistic approach to recovery (Messinger,
2010). Messinger (2010) notes military personnel are also trying to
make sense of, and search for meaning within, their individual circumstances. Frequently, individuals are attempting to establish a new
(often non-military) identity and integrating this into their lives
(Messinger, 2010). Further, clinical approaches to mental illness are
frequently stigmatised (especially within a setting underpinned by
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychsport.2017.12.003
Received 1 August 2017; Received in revised form 2 November 2017; Accepted 5 December 2017
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: S.Peacock@leedsbeckett.ac.uk (S. Peacock), D.Carless@leedsbeckett.ac.uk (D. Carless), J.McKenna@leedsbeckett.ac.uk (J. McKenna).
Psychology of Sport & Exercise 35 (2018) 151–159
Available online 06 December 2017 1469-0292/ © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
T
hegonomic masculinity) (Hoge et al., 2004; Iverson et al., 2010; Osório,
Jones, Fertout, & Greenberg, 2013) and accompanied by multiple barriers to care (Gould et al., 2010; Jones et al., 2013; Langston et al.,
2010). In light of this, there has been a call to develop ‘alternative
treatment approaches that are not associated with hospitals, rehabilitation centres, or other clinical settings’ (Dustin, Bricker, Arave,
Wall, & Wendt, 2011, p. 329).
1.1. Sport and adventure interventions
One approach attracting attention is the use of sport and adventurous physical activity. To date, there are a handful of programmes
which use sport and/or adventurous physical activity to facilitate recovery among military personnel and veterans. There is now a small but
growing evidence base which suggests participation can facilitate recovery among military personnel and veterans. In particular, a recent
systematic review highlighted a number of holistic benefits and demonstrated the therapeutic value of sport and physical activity on the
health and well-being of disabled combat-veterans and veterans diagnosed with PTSD (Caddick & Smith, 2014). For example, positive affective experiences and reductions to depression and PTSD symptomology were achieved through adventure and outward bound activities
(Caddick, Smith, & Phoenix, 2015b; Dustin et al., 2011; Gelkopf,
Hasson-Ohayon, Bikman, & Kravetz, 2013; Hyer, Boyd, Scurfield,
Smith, & Burke, 1996; Ragsdale, Cox, Finn, & Eisler, 1996), exercise
(Otter & Currie, 2004) and adapted sport and recreation (Bennett, Van
Puymbroeck, Piatt, & Rydell, 2014b; Lundberg, Bennett, & Smith,
2011). Moreover, in addition to facilitating a more optimistic outlook
on life, participation in exercise (Otter & Currie, 2004), sport (Brittain &
Green, 2012; Caddick, Smith, & Phoenix, 2015a; Carless, 2014; Carless,
Peacock, McKenna, & Cooke, 2013; Hawkins, Cory, & Crowe, 2011;
Sporner et al., 2009) and adventure (Bennett, Lundberg, Zabriskie, &
Eggett, 2014a, 2014b; Burke & Utley, 2013; Carless & Douglas, 2016;
Duvall & Kaplan, 2013; Hyer et al., 1996) was also associated with reintegration and a sense of connection.
Although research exploring the impact of sport and physical activity on the recovery of military personnel is generating momentum,
the evidence base remains sparse. Furthermore research frequently
adopts a quantitative approach to measure the impact of an intervention on, for example, symptoms of PTSD and depression (Bennett et al.,
2014a; Gelkopf et al., 2013; Hyer et al., 1996), quality of life (Gelkopf
et al., 2013; Lundberg et al., 2011; Sporner et al. (2009), social functioning (Duvall & Kaplan, 2013) and self-concept (Cordova et al.,
1998). While these studies offer important insights, they are unable to
provide an understanding of the personal meaning and value of participation.
In light of this, a small number of qualitative approaches have been
represented within the literature more recently (e.g. Bennett et al.,
2014b; Burke & Utley, 2013; Caddick et al., 2015a, 2015b). In particular, several studies have used storytelling approaches to offer compelling insights into the recovery experiences of military personnel.
Notably, the complex experiences of personnel with injury and/or illness have been represented through performance ethnography (Douglas
& Carless, 2015a), fiction (Douglas & Carless, 2016), and creative nonfiction (Carless, Sparkes, Douglas, & Cooke, 2014). In exploring participant experiences and personal journeys, they also highlight the value,
meaning and benefit of sport and adventure, and explore these within
the context of their lives.
This study responds to calls for further research in this area (Burke &
Utley, 2013; Carless et al., 2013), especially from a qualitative perspective (Caddick & Smith, 2014; Ray, 2009). The purpose of the study
is therefore two fold. First, using creative non-fiction, it will explore the
meaning and value of adapted sport (AS) and adapted adventurous
training (AAT) programme for military personnel who are experiencing
mental health problems. Second, it will explore the fictional representation in light of judgement criteria.
2. Method
2.1. Research setting
The research took place at the Battle Back Centre Lilleshall (BBC),
the home of a 5-day residential AS and AAT intervention for the recovery and personal development of UK military personnel. Offering 24
multi-activity courses a year and accommodating 22 participants per
programme, the Centre operates on a participant:coach ratio of 3:1.
Programme development and delivery is underpinned by the SelfDetermination Theory (SDT) (Ryan & Deci, 2000), which suggests that
optimal psychological wellbeing can only be achieved when the psychological need for Autonomy, Competence and Relatedness are supported. Autonomy is a sense of control or ownership over one's action
and behaviour. Competence reflects an individual's perception of proficiency and the ability to bring about a desired outcome. Relatedness is
feelings of involvement and connection with others and the social environment. Ministry of Defence staff and Civilian programme facilitators attended multiple Staff Training sessions that provided detailed
information on the SDT and enabled staff to develop strategies to
support the three psychological needs within the programme.
A typical day opens with a morning brief, which introduces participants to relevant psychological concepts, strategy or models (e.g.
motivation, behaviour, attitude, or goal setting). Following this, personnel participate in a variety of AS (e.g. wheelchair basketball,
wheelchair badminton, seated volleyball, fishing and indoor bowling)
and AAT (e.g. indoor rock climbing, caving, clay pigeon shooting, archery and kayaking) activities. On completion of the activities, personnel are supported to reflect on their day, apply their learning, and
plan for their future. A selection of social activities are held in the
evening to promote social interaction and integration (e.g. cinema trip,
quiz night, inspirational presentations and evening walks). Within and
surrounding the sporting and social sessions are on-going opportunities
for informal conversation with coaching staff, military staff, the researcher and other participants.
2.2. Procedures
Following institutional ethical approval, the first author (AUTHOR
NAME) conducted intensive fieldwork at the BBC over 18 months, attending 35 courses. (AUTHOR NAME) is a white British, civilian female
from a middle-class background who was in her late twenties at the
time of data collection. She was included within this research due to her
interpersonal skills and ability to engage in the outdoor elements of the
programme with ease. While the challenges and possible power dynamics of being a female, middle-class civilian operating in a military
environment dominated by male military personnel with life changing
injuries and illnesses are recognised, they are explored in more detail
elsewhere (Peacock, 2017). In particular, in attempt to face these
challenges and reduce possible power dynamics, (AUTHOR NAME)
demonstrated respect and genuine interest in participants, and made
every effort to remain neutral and non-judgemental. When interacting
with personnel she endeavoured to be an active listener, which was
communicated verbally and non-verbally.
Adopting the role of participant-as-observer, AUTHOR NAME became an active member of the BBC team, participating in the course
day-to-day. AUTHOR NAME also shared mealtimes with participants
and joined the group for many social events (e.g. morning walks, cinema trips and evening visits to the onsite bar). Within this role,
AUTHOR NAME conducted one-on-one semi-structured interviews with
25 participants. When conducting semi-structured interviews, Guest,
Bunce, and Johnson (2006) suggest the basic elements for metathemes
become apparent following six interviews, with data saturation occurring within 12 interviews. The broader research project achieved 25
participants for two reasons: i) oversampling allowed for a selection of
semi-structured interviews which did not produce in-depth data and; ii)
S. Peacock et al. Psychology of Sport & Exercise 35 (2018) 151–159
152
the research was frontloaded to allow for attrition when beginning
follow-up interviews in the future.
In line with Patton (2002), a conversational strategy was used
within an interview guide approach. This combined strategy meant the
interview guide provided provisional structure and ensured the same
general line of enquiry was explored with each individual. However,
while the topics of enquiry were pre-determined, (AUTHOR NAME) still
had the freedom and flexibility to explore and develop conversation
naturally and spontaneously within this framework. The interview
guide was framed around three areas. The opening section focussed on
participant's background and their experience of injury/illness (e.g.
amputation, PTSD, anxiety). The second section elicited responses
about their expectation of the BBC, while the final section directed
attention towards their BBC experience.
2.3. Analysis and representation
Following verbatim transcription of the interviews, we utilised a
storytelling approach to analyse and represent participants' experiences. Within the context of recovering Service personnel, creative
nonfiction remains an alternative and unusual approach to representing
research findings. Our approach fits within the ‘creative non-fiction’
genre which typically use a variety of literary techniques to present
findings artfully, compellingly and powerfully (Smith, 2013; Sparkes,
2002). It is based on an approach previously used in sport and exercise
psychology research (e.g. Blodgett, Yang, Schinke, & McGannon, 2017;
Carless & Douglas, 2010; Carless & Sparkes, 2008; Douglas & Carless,
2006, 2015b; Erickson, Backhouse, & Carless, 2016; Irish, Cavallerio, &
McDonald, in press). Within these, authors use vivid descriptions,
evocative and metaphorical language and detailed scenes to portray an
event or experience (Sparkes, 2002). In other examples, the story is
grounded in data (e.g. interviews, observations and illustrations) yet
represented in a fictional form of writing (Carless et al., 2014; Douglas
& Carless, 2015a; Erickson et al., 2016; Irish et al., in press). A distinguishing feature within this paper is that the story is developed from the
participant's own words taken verbatim and in context from the interview transcripts. Specifically, we removed or inserted words only when
we felt it necessary to make the account comprehensible. In addition,
we also altered the chronology or sequence of some events (as recounted in the interviews) in an effort to create a more coherent story.
While all participants recounted insightful, powerful and thought
provoking experiences that shed light on their experience of illness and
recovery, two participants shared particularly insightful, informative,
and extensive accounts. They provided, for example, richly detailed
accounts which were supplemented with specific examples and reflections that used emotionally revealing and evocative language. We developed creative non-fiction stories, told in the first person voice, on the
basis of these two participants' experiences. Given space constraints, we
present here one participant's story to provide rich and detailed insights
into the recovery process and, specifically, the contribution of an AS
and AAT course. Paul (aged 41) is a highly ranked officer in the Army
who was diagnosed with PTSD following numerous Operational Tours
of Duty.
After developing, editing and revising the story, we shared it with
Paul. This process of ‘member reflections’ (Smith & McGannon, 2017)
enabled Paul and the lead author to engage in dialogue and reflect on
the story. Importantly, this joint and collaborative process aimed to
minimise the power issues that arise when creating and presenting a
participants story. On completion of this discussion, Paul identified that
he was comfortable with the story, making only minor amendments to
specific facts.
2.4. Criteria for judgement
Within sport and exercise psychology, storytelling remains an alternative and unusual approach to representing research findings.
Therefore, adopting this relatively unorthodox approach means that
identifying appropriate judgment criteria is essential (Sparkes, 2002).
Notably, Sparkes (2002) argues that traditional approaches that are tied
to reliability, validity, and replicability are not suitable for judging
creative nonfiction. Therefore, being grounded in a criteriologist perspective (Sparkes & Smith, 2013) and drawing upon the work of a
number of researchers in sport, exercise and health (Carless & Sparkes,
2008; Carless et al., 2014; Douglas & Carless, 2006, 2015b; Smith,
McGannon, & Williams, 2015; Sparkes & Smith, 2014; Sparkes, 2002),
we worked to meet 5 criteria that we invite readers to use to judge this
study.
Meaningful coherence concerns the way different parts of the interpretation create a complete and meaningful picture. Carless and
Sparkes (2008 p. 198) specifically ask a number of questions which are
connected to the need for coherence: Have the sometimes disorganized
and fragmentary accounts of the participants been brought together in
such a way as to create a readable and meaningful picture of the individual's experience? Do the parts fit, and do the stories hold together
in an intelligible and articulate manner? In this regard we might also
ask of these stories, are they plausible? Do they seem credible in pulling
together a believable combination of the parts? Substantive contribution
and worthiness considers whether our research is relevant, timely, significant, interesting, contributing conceptually/theoretically, practically, and methodologically to our understanding of social life? Within
the context of this paper, it questions whether our work provides new
knowledge, fresh insights, or a deeper understanding about the experiences of a participant attending the BBC. Aesthetic merit ultimately
asks whether this story ‘works’. It is tied to the creativity of the story
and the reader's level of engagement with it. It considers whether the
story invites dialogue and questions from the reader and considers
whether it captures and maintains the reader's attention. Impact reflects
how the story affects the reader on an emotional and intellectual level.
It questions whether the story stimulates questions or encourages the
reader to engage in new and/or alternative research approaches. Expression of reality asks whether the following text embodies a sense of
lived experience. It questions whether our research is a credible account
and seems ‘true’ or ‘real’.
With these criteria in mind, we now present Paul's story. Please be
advised that the story graphically portrays certain realities of war
which some may find challenging.
3. Paul's story
Joining the Army was a leap of faith really. I was hoping it would
somehow be my salvation. To some extent, it was also a bit of escapism. I
was escaping life as I knew it. Escaping an existence of confusion. An
existence of hesitation, of monotony. I had a feeling that there must be
more to life. You see, it was not a particular ambition of mine. One just
fell into it really. I wanted to do something a bit different and joining the
Army was as much of a difference as I could possibly imagine at that
time.
I was hoping the Army would give me experiences where I could get my
hands dirty. I thought it would be something out of the ordinary. I also
thought it was quite a sexy career, quite elitist. You know, not everyone
joins the Army. Not everyone passes selection. To some extent I thought it
would give me a degree of kudos that other things could not have offered.
I also thought it would involve travel.
Broadly speaking, it did meet my expectations. But I was also incredibly
naïve, cause you don't know what it’s going to be like until you're actually
doing it. So for instance, it was unusual for someone in my role to be as
front line as I was - being shot at, rocketed and all the rest of it. But you
can't really do that role properly, I think, unless you are yourself shooting
to kill or being shot at. So, for me at least, I wanted to do it the very, very,
very, very best that I possibly could. And for me it was all in. It was all in
from as soon as we touched ground until when we came back. I elected to
S. Peacock et al. Psychology of Sport & Exercise 35 (2018) 151–159
153
go on numerous day and night front line patrols, which meant I could
understand the operating environment and the men on the ground. I
could relate to their experiences. I could relate to what they were seeing
and the areas they were talking about. I had ground truth.
I also had a huge amount of responsibility. Ultimately, I had to protect
our guys in situations where people die. For example, let's say the ground
intelligence has identified three guys chained into their suicide vests in a
compound. They've said their prayers and are intending to leave under
the cover of dawn where they'll kill loads of people. ‘Right, can we take
them out?’ That's my decision. But I need more information – Who else is
there? Are civilians there? Are wives and children in these compounds?
What else is in the area? We don't know. But if we don't get them now
they're gonna be off and killing people in a few hours when dawn breaks.
So, do we strike now whilst we've got the chance? I'll probably make a
decision like that over breakfast, or maybe tea!
And then there are situations where people die when they shouldn't. You
see, warning shots have an uncanny knack of hitting civilians when they
ricochet off something. Let's say you've got a .5 calibre and the top cover
fires a warning shot. But the round goes up through the engine of a car
coming into the convoy and kills the driver. The same round goes and
kills the female back passenger through her head. Her skull explodes with
such velocity it then kills the 3-year old child she's carrying on the back
seat. How do you explain that away when you've got people on your tail
saying - ‘what the fuck's going on? That's partly why I'm ill.
How did I find that? I guess I just found a way to keep going really. You
don't have an option. You're in Service, so you keep on serving. I had a
responsibility. It would be completely impossible for me to have said: ‘I've
had enough of this, I'm going home’ or ‘I can't deal with this any longer’.
That was beyond any contemplation. I also had the burden of the safety
of so many guys out on the ground who were having a far worse time of it
than I was.
When I was out there, nobody understood the type of work I was undertaking. No one. There was no structure in place for me to be debriefed.
But then, I didn't expect it. There was no awareness of that need, even
back then. So, I guess it was probably overlooked. I had no decompression when I came home either. I flew straight back to the UK. I remember
picking up a hire car driving down the road at 100mph thinking I was
invincible. I thought – ‘I've got to calm down here, I've got to calm down
here’.
Even when I came back no one understood. Within 2 or 3 days of being
home my chain-of-command wanted a chat. We spoke for an hour and a
half but they didn't fully appreciate the complexity of my task. They just
didn't have a clue as they had no ground truth. And why would they,
unless they'd been there? No one understood because no one had done
that. I think one must concede that. They can't be blamed necessarily. It's
just a feature of what happens when you go in to do something like that at
such intensity. People at home just don't realise. I don't think they understood the ramifications of what I was doing over there. They didn't
understand what a critical role I had. I don't think they realised the intensity of what we were doing, the pace at which we were doing it. They
didn't understand the unpredictability of it all. No one understood.
Also, because I was somewhat on the peripheries, I wasn't part of a
Regiment or co-located with my Brigade on return to the UK. There was
never anybody there to talk to. No one I could have a beer with and sort
of unload on or normalise things. So, I just kept it bottled up. I kept it
bottled up for about 3 or 4 years.
During that time I realised I wasn't functioning well. Everything was hard
work. Everything was an effort. Work would take me longer to do.
Although the record would show that my performance didn't dip, the
effort to keep performing at that level was so much it broke me. I just
couldn't cope anymore. The continual stuff about Afghanistan being in
my in-tray, the hyper arousal and startling noise were all part of the
Afghan puzzle. But it was also complicated by the fact that I was sexually
assaulted when I was fifteen, and that had been suppressed for all those
years.
It's been explained to me as like having a balloon of air which you're
trying to hold under water. You know, it comes up very quickly once you
release it. And I think that happened to me. So I started therapy in 2010
and have spent 2 of the last 4 years off work. But I didn't know at that
stage the effect Afghanistan was having on me. Because I had been
sexually abused when I was little, all the focus of the treatment was on
that. It completely neglected the whole Afghan piece. So I wasn't making
any progress really. I've since reported the sexual thing to the police. It all
went to court and the guy who did it ended up pleading guilty and was
sent off to prison. It's only through that process the whole Afghan piece
has really come to the fore. That's something that caused the PTSD and is
now the focus of my treatment.
I've been having treatment for four years and I'm still so bad I've got to be
discharged. Life at the moment is just shocking really. I'm absolutely lost
and exhausted. It's relentless. I think I have lost hope. I have lost hope. I
can't see what the future looks like, but I know what the present feels like.
I'm full of anxiety. Full of confusion. Full of doubt. I don't have any sense
of direction in my life. I don't know what I want to do or what I'm able to
do. I'm very lost. I've got no hope of working. I'm not in a fit state to work
in any sort of conventional employment. I used to be - I still am I suppose
- a Lieutenant Colonel in the Army. Now I'm shattered. Absolutely
shattered. I'm disgusted with the way I look, my physical state. I used to
be really fit, really ripped. But that's gone. I'm well over weight by conservatively two stone. I'm frustrated by my mental state. I'm severely
depressed and everything's an effort. I don't have a good relationship with
alcohol and I over eat as a coping strategy. I use short term fixes, such as
caffeine, alcohol or taking too much of my prescribed medication just to
get out of it. And, you know, all the safety mechanisms of my family
there to support me, none of it means anything to me. I don't feel that's a
reason not to top myself. I have daily thoughts of just ending it because to
keep on going is just so exhausting.
I'm not in a state where I can support myself either. I've been given a
whole list of exercises to do and I've done barely any of them. I just don't
have the discipline. I'm not available to make that commitment, even to
myself. My default position is to curl up in a ball and sleep or take too
much of my medication or use disruptive and unhealthy coping mechanisms, just to sort of get me through the day. I might eat m&ms for
Britain or packets of malted milk or pints of milk or alcohol. I really wish
I'd had the ability to help myself, but I think I've got to accept that I'm not
even able to help myself. And that's where all the hope evaporates, where
I can't even help myself, not even in the basic things, such as stop eating
junk food, or stop drinking in an unhealthy way.
I also get angry about all the feelings that flood back from Afghanistan.
That anger: trying to fight fires and keep everyone happy. That whole
pressure. And when you've got all those things spinning around on repeat
in your mind it's very difficult to find hope and find that path out of that
downward spiral.
For me, recovery means being physically fit again. Being robust. Trying to
ease my pain. Ease my physical pain. Let alone the mental anguish. It
also means having a role and purpose. I think I'm prepared that my
purpose or role may not be something that I hither to would have thought
as very Gucci. I may have to be, perhaps, more modest. But that's not to
say that the job would not be as fulfilling or worthwhile.
Anyway, because I'm being Medically Retired I was forced to come to the
Battle Back Centre. The Lilleshall MAC is a mandatory part of my resettlement and recovery pathway. So in conjunction with my Core
Recovery Events, it prepares me for civilian life and a civilian career. To
be honest, I felt quite irritated being made to attend the course, especially
because I felt that the people who were supposed to be supporting me in
the Personnel Recovery Unit (PRU) weren't actually listening to me. They
S. Peacock et al. Psychology of Sport & Exercise 35 (2018) 151–159
154
were adamant that I'd enjoy the activities. Yet, regardless of whatever
activities are going on here, I just didn't want to be thrown into a situation
without a choice and exposed to 24 other people with similar issues.
People like me. It was this I wanted to avoid. I wasn't ready for it. The
whole thing of breaking down barriers, getting to know people and
talking. People wanting to know what's wrong with you or telling you
what's wrong with them. It's just too overwhelming. I guess it's also because I'm having trouble accepting my illness.
I feared the week would be a busy, hectic, noisy time where I would just
get increasingly stressed and not be able to cope. I thought it would be 24
people in a classroom or on activities, rolling from one activity into another activity. I wasn't concerned about the activities. It was all about the
setting. Meal times are a difficulty for me. You know, I can't abide sitting
or standing in a queue or abide sitting on a big table with lots of noise and
lots of people and lots of fuss. I'd much rather be on my own. I realise
coming here I'd have to get over some of those issues and try and find a
way of coping. But I didn't want to have to find ways of coping. I just
didn't need that additional burden or hurdle. I had the idea of just
quitting, of phoning up and getting a driver to take me home. Or just
going AWOL from here, just walking off somewhere on my own. To be
honest, I don't think I actually got past that thought. I don't think I was
able to think about coping here. It was about – what if I don't cope?
However, four days in, I'm still here.
I think it was different to what I expected. Being in the smaller groups
made the difference. I've also been really impressed with all the coaches. I
think they've really got a lot of things right. Whilst it's been interesting
seeing other people on the course like me, the greatest benefit is actually
meeting the coaches and being assured that they're sensible, experienced,
and actually care. When I look back on the Lilleshall experience, I will be
thinking of how the coaches have been positive role models. They've been
through their own trials and tribulations but they're positive. They're
upbeat. They're fit. They're motivated. They're doing something that
matters to people like me. So it's something for me to aspire to. But that's
in conjunction with some of the guys and girls. You know, seeing Sarah
shooting with me. Mark climbing with the same gusto as me, talking to
Pete about the products he uses for cleaning his car and watching John
doing the archery today. It was good fun and it shows me how others are
in the same or similar predicament as me. Seeing them having little wins
and little triumphs in themselves has helped.
It's also a very supportive atmosphere. There's been several times this
week that I've felt particularly supported. One was when we were at the
climbing wall on Tuesday. My coach and climbing partner were outside
in the sunshine and I was keen to have another climb. John saw me and
out of the blue said: ‘do you fancy having another climb?’ I said ‘yeah’,
and he gave me a climb and that was good. Then he just sat down and
had a chat with me. I discovered he was a Marine – the best and worst of
my Service was with Marines. And he really got it. He understood where I
was by drawing on his own experience and his own journey. I felt that
there was somebody that I could relate to. And that hasn't happened
much. Maybe once or twice. But I struggle to find someone who can
really relate to my story and my experiences. But I felt that he had. He
was further down the recovery pathway than I am and he had some good
advice. And I felt that the way in which he spoke to me made me feel less
isolated. It gave me a bit of confidence, a bit of hope that things will move
on from where they are right now and maybe a big step will be when I am
actually out of the Army and have a bit more autonomy. That might
empower me to navigate me through my recovery with more gusto and
more confidence than I am at the moment.
Interestingly, throughout the whole week I've had little chats with most of
the coaches and each time I've felt that they were there to give me confidence, which I don't have much of. That's been probably more valuable
than the events themselves. Also, that enthusiasm and confidence that we
are doing things in a safe environment makes me feel better. So my
experience therefore is made better by the confidence that the coaches
transfer on to me.
Looking back, I would describe Lilleshall as an ideal opportunity to get to
know yourself a little better, and that's something I've not done for a long
time. Getting to know what makes me buzz. You know, going on the cycle
ride today and going down the track quite fast was great fun and I really
enjoyed that. And doing something like that where I don't have to own the
bike. No responsibility I suppose. And doing the shooting and the archery,
it's allowed me to have some Paul time, which I don't feel I have much of.
You know, it's an opportunity to have some me time but in an environment where you can then develop yourself. You learn some things in the
morning sessions and realise that you're not alone. You realise that other
people are going through the same struggles as you and there's a chance
of some mutual support.
This week has also been fun too. You know, I've laughed. I have actually
laughed. The last time I laughed was four months ago when my 10 year
old son overtook me while go-karting. The other occasion was when I was
skiing. Again, I watched my son ski past me at speed. During those
moments I connect with myself being Paul. The Paul who used to be quite
mischievous, quite impish and a bit of a devil. A bit childlike I guess.
Yeah, it's a childlike freedom. It makes me feel good, makes me feel
connected, makes me feel in the moment. But they're just glimpses. But to
come here and laugh, you know, when you did that gym pose in the
swimming pool, like a marble statue, that made me laugh because I
wasn't expecting it. It was fun. Carefree. And cycling today, that made
me laugh. So, Lilleshall has given me those moments. It makes me feel
fulfilled. It makes me feel at peace with myself. It makes me feel quite
happy. And, I think it makes me feel quite self-indulgent. It's a little
treasure, a little moment to yourself, or with others, but in a very intimate
way. It's a moment that's there and gone. Never to be repeated in quite
the same context.
I wouldn't want anyone to feel that Lilleshall is somewhat futile in the
whole scheme of things. I think it's very important and I've deeply appreciated the investment that the coaches have put into the course. I
deeply respect the staff and think they're doing a fantastic job to help
people like me. I'm also humbled by the amount of money which The
Royal British Legion (TRBL) have clearly invested. In my own situation,
I'm at a pretty low ebb and am quite vulnerable, but coming here and
being with the coaches and other boys and girls has allowed me to relax
and enjoy the sport and camaraderie. I think it has given me some hope. I
just hope that that hope endures and the benefits of the course endure