Multiple Motives for Adventure Sport Revisited: A Multi-Activity Investigation
ABSTRACT 
The growing popularity of adventure recreation highlights the need to understand its participants and the individual characteristics of these activities in order to target health and well-being outcomes through adventure leisure pursuits. While exploratory qualitative studies have questioned the centrality of risk and thrill in adventure recreation, these studies often involved small sample sizes and amalgamated diverse adventure activities. The current study investigated adventure recreation motives via semi-structured interviews with a large sample (n ¼ 84) of expert participants across six distinct air, land and water-based adventure activities (e.g., wingsuit BASE jumping, freeriding, downhill mountain biking, big-wave surfing). Seven themes (underpinned by 12 subthemes) emerged during thematic data analysis as key adventure recreation motives: holistic living, emotional diversity, competence, social connectedness, nature experience, agency, and optimal mental states. Although all themes were present across each adventure activity, data illustrated differences in the relative importance of motives across activities. Findings suggested that (1) adventure recreation and associated motives are more heterogeneous than currently conceptualized, and (2) adventure recreation motives should be more broadly conceptualized beyond hedonic motives (e.g., risk and thrill-seeking) to encompass more diverse eudaimonic motives.
Introduction 
Although participation numbers are difficult to quantify, both academic and industry research acknowledge the growing popularity of adventure recreation in leisure settings (Clough et al., 2016; NPD Group, 2020). While traditional adventure recreation motivation frameworks have focused primarily on the primacy of risk and thrill-seeking (Kar & Tarafder, 2020; Llewellyn & Sanchez, 2008), several authors have suggested that the motives for adventure activities, both in leisure and sport contexts, extend beyond hedonistic rewards associated with risk and sensation-seeking. For instance, multiple studies of adventure recreation participants have countered traditional narratives by illustrating how participation is used to engender psychological well-being (e.g., Brymer & Schweitzer, 2013a; Jones et al., 2017; Kerr & Houge Mackenzie, 2012), and self-transcendence in activities such as mountaineering and BASE jumping (Monasterio & Cloninger, 2018). Qualitative studies in particular suggest that adventure recreation motives are more diverse than previously thought, and are often linked to eudaimonic well-being outcomes, rather than hedonic or competitive outcomes (e.g., Ewert et al., 2020; Houge Mackenzie & Hodge, 2020). Houge Mackenzie and Hodge (2020) presented a conceptual framework illustrating how adventure recreation can enhance eudemonic subjective well-being through nature contact and the satisfaction of the basic psychological needs. These authors identified the need for adventure research that explores a broader range of participation motives and outcomes, beyond risk and thrillseeking, in order to reconceptualise how adventure can contribute to life-enhancing leisure across a range of populations.
While defining ‘adventure’ remains an ongoing challenge for the field, since different terms (e.g., extreme, high-risk, action, alternative, or lifestyle sports) have often been used interchangeably to describe diverse adventure activities, the following definition encapsulates many core components of modern adventure leisure pursuits: “self-initiated nature-based physical activities that generate heightened bodily sensations [ … ] and require skill development to manage unique perceived and objective risks” (Boudreau et al., 2020). This definition was employed in the current study as it is conceptually aligned with a leisure-based perspective on adventure (e.g., self-initiated activities), and frames the risks encountered in adventure as unique rather than inherently or purposefully higher than those in everyday life, which supports a broadening of current adventure conceptualisations across a range of leisure contexts (e.g., Barlow et al., 2013; Brymer & Schweitzer, 2013b; Reid & Kampman, 2020). 
Emerging adventure frameworks: Eudaimonic motives
Eudaimonic well-being encompasses meaning, purpose, optimal functioning, self-realization and flourishing (Huppert & So, 2013), whereas hedonic well-being consists of pleasure, positive emotions and avoidance of pain (Waterman et al., 2008). Hedonic motivations are often momentary and result in short time goals (Waterman et al., 2008). This aligns with traditional explanations of adventure recreation motives on sensation or thrill-seeking, but also on affective responses after the activity (Castanier et al., 2011). Eudaimonic motives are more complex and have not been as widely explored in adventure research (exceptions include e.g., rock climbing, whitewater boating, mountain biking, BASE jumping [Ewert et al., 2020; Monasterio & Brymer, 2021; Monasterio & Cloninger, 2018]). 
However, in the past decade, a robust body of knowledge highlighting the role of eudaimonic motives, such as meaning, connection to others, self-transcendence and self-development, suggests that these play an important role in adventure pursuits and might be more connected to subjective well-being in the long-term than hedonic motives (Ewert et al., 2020; Houge Mackenzie & Brymer, 2020). Ewert et al. (2020) recently investigated hedonic and eudaimonic motives in the adventure activities of rock climbing, whitewater boating and mountain biking and identified the following eudaimonic motives: social connections, personal growth, sense of achievement, identity work, escape. Social connections and identity in particular have been identified in a range of qualitative studies of adventure motivation investigating activities such as rock and mountain climbing, backcountry skiing and snowboarding, mountain biking and kayaking (e.g., Dilley & Scraton, 2010; Fru€hauf et al., 2017; Kerr & Houge Mackenzie, 2012). Ewert et al. (2020) also identified the following hedonic motives for rock climbing, whitewater boating and mountain biking: flow experiences, sense of mastery, challenge, connection to nature, autonomy, and risk or danger. Although these authors framed connection to nature as hedonistic, previous research has associated the connection to nature with eudaimonic well-being (Zelenski & Nisbet, 2014). Connection to nature that extends beyond hedonistic rewards has been noted in multiple adventure recreation studies (e.g., Fru€hauf et al., 2017; Kerr & Houge Mackenzie, 2012; MacIntyre et al., 2019).
Exploratory adventure studies have generally been characterized by small sample sizes (e.g., under 20 participants, case studies), and a wide variety of identified motives in different adventure activities. Kerr and Houge Mackenzie (2012, n ¼ 5) found that while adventure recreation participants’ motivation was multifaceted and idiosyncratic, common motives included goal achievement, social motivation, escape from boredom, overcoming fear, connecting with the natural environment, and pleasurable kinesthetic sensations. Jones et al. (2017) [n ¼ 4] reported mastery and disinhibition as key motives for winter climbers. Other studies (n  15) have focused on an overarching adventure recreation motive, such as transformation, search for freedom, or nature which could be framed in eudaimonic terms (Brymer & Schweitzer, 2013b; Holmbom et al., 2017; MacIntyre et al., 2019). These findings highlight the need to better understand the complexity of adventure recreation motives by examining a broader range of potential motives across a larger sample and diverse activities.
Challenges in adventure recreation research 
A key challenge for adventure recreation researchers is the diversity of activities this term encompasses. Both qualitative and quantitative research in this area has often amalgamated diverse activities during thematic or statistical analyses, respectively (Brymer & Schweitzer, 2013b; Ewert et al., 2013; Kerr & Houge Mackenzie, 2012). While exploratory studies have revealed important commonalities in adventure recreation motives, some findings question the primacy of various motives across distinct adventure recreations (Kerr & Houge Mackenzie, 2012). Researchers have been increasingly critical of approaches that amalgamate adventure activities, as this often fails to capture the diversity of adventure activities and motives (Barlow et al., 2013; Fru€hauf et al., 2019; Woodman et al., 2020). 
Adventure recreation can be practiced in very different ways which may foster unique participation motives and experiences (see Immonen et al. (2017)). For example, Barlow et al. (2013) found that skydiving, a short-duration air-based activity, was associated with distinct motives than mountaineering, an extended-duration land-based activity. Moreover, within one activity (e.g., skiing), the physiological or psychological demands may vary depending on specific disciplines (e.g., mountaineering skills in freeride skiing; acrobatic skills in freestyle skiing), which may engender different motives (Immonen et al., 2017). For instance, Fru€hauf et al. (2019) found that backcountry skiers reported higher levels of sensation-seeking, emotion regulation and agency compared to traditional skiers. In contrast, Ewert et al. (2020), did not find significant differences in eudaimonic or hedonic motives across rock climbing, whitewater boating or mountainbiking participants. However, they suggested that hedonic and eudaimonic motives may be temporally linked to different adventure activity phases. Whereas descriptions about the experience during the activity were often accompanied by hedonic motivation, descriptions about the experience connected with the activity (e.g., the social factor, identity) were categorized as eudaimonic motives. Few research has framed adventure motives in eudaimonic and hedonic terms (Ewert et al., 2020). Furthermore, following the reversal theory (Apter, 2001), motives in adventure recreation may not only differ due to the duration and challenges of different activities but may change over time in relation to skill- and or experience level (Immonen et al., 2017). Therefore, study approaches in this field may also benefit from including participants of the same skill level.
Study purpose 
The growing popularity of adventure recreation highlights the need to understand its participants and the individual characteristics of these activities in order to target health and well-being outcomes through adventure leisure pursuits. The literature on adventure recreation motives has arguably been limited by smaller samples and the amalgamation of distinct activities being investigated as one homogenous adventure activity. Exploratory findings indicate that these motives (1) may be more complex than traditionally conceptualized; (2) may vary in relation to distinct adventure recreations (e.g., environment); and (3) may encompass diverse eudaimonic (e.g., meaning, purpose, optimal functioning) and hedonic (e.g., sensation or thrill-seeking) motives. As Ewert et al (2020) mentioned, there is limited research available linking eudaimonic and hedonic motives with adventure recreation in different activities, the current study aimed to extend this research into a broader qualitative investigation of adventure recreation motives across a large sample of highly skilled participants engaged in distinct air, land and water-based adventure activities.
Method 
The current research was guided by a pragmatic research philosophy (Feilzer, 2010). Pragmatism acknowledges that multiple realities exist and focuses on the research problem and the consequences (Feilzer, 2010; Giacobbi et al., 2005). Pragmatic research is used in sport and exercise psychology and allows the use of pluralistic approaches to gain a deeper understanding of the phenomena of interest (Giacobbi et al., 2005). The authors understood that personal experiences with the study phenomenon would influence data collection and analysis and recognized their values, experiences, and priorities in the research process. Four authors had a background in psychology, three also had sport science expertise, and four were adventure recreation participants from various disciplines (representing air, land and water-based activities). While the authors’ experiences inherently influenced study design and analysis, their distinct backgrounds (e.g., female and male adventure participants, and non-participants, from Europe, North America, and Oceania) also provided advantages in terms of understanding unique adventure contexts and being able to critique ‘insider’ perspectives, respectively. Furthermore, the multi-level inductive analysis approach described below fostered a rigorous data analysis process informed by multiple researcher lenses and backgrounds.
Participants and sampling 
Eighty-four (n ¼ 84) highly skilled European adventure recreation participants (M [experience] ¼ 11.5 years ± 5.23; 25% female, 75% male) aged between 18 and 59 years (M [age] ¼ 27.29 years ± 4.06) were interviewed as part of a larger study on adventure recreation participation. Participants’ main activities included freeriding (ski or snowboard); freestyle snowboarding, downhill mountain biking, wingsuit BASE jumping, bigwave surfing and alpinism/free solo climbing (see Table 1). Participants were purposefully sampled based on competitive or sponsored participation in their activity for at least four years. 1 Since past research with highly experienced and skilled adventure participants has suggested that these participants are more likely to have developed a wider range of participation motives as they were more likely to be able to reflect on and articulate a range of adventure motives which may have evolved over time (Brymer & Schweitzer, 2013b; Jones et al., 2017; Kerr & Houge Mackenzie, 2012; MacIntyre et al., 2019), the current study set those inclusion criteria to objectively ensure that participants had the required experience and skill-level to successfully participate in the activity. Professional athletes (i.e., earned a living through sport) comprised 27% of the sample, while partially sponsored athletes (i.e., sponsored but did not earn a living via sport) comprised 60% and wingsuit BASE jumpers 1 comprised 13% of the sample, respectively. The sociodemographic makeup of the study participants mirrored demographic trends observed in larger adventure recreation populations (i.e., primarily white young males with middle to high socioeconomic status [e.g., Wheaton & Thorpe, 2018]). The male to female ratio was similar to quantitative studies investigating adventure activities (Barlow et al., 2013; Fru€hauf et al., 2019). Approval by Board for Ethical Questions in Science of the University of Innsbruck in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki was given prior to the study (No. 47/2016;40/2019).
Participants were selected using two purposive sampling strategies: criterion-based sampling and maximum variation sampling (Corbin & Strauss, 2015). Participants with high levels of knowledge and experience regarding adventure recreation motives were selected, whilst including variations in age, gender, activity, and professional status (Sparkes & Smith, 2014). Sport psychology researchers (Jackson & Marsh, 1996) have argued that participants with greater levels of experience and proficiency have a larger experiential reference base to draw upon and therefore may provide richer data regarding psychological aspects of participation. Participants were recruited via snowballing (Corbin & Strauss, 2015), which was initiated by contacting expert and/or professional land, water, and air-based adventure recreation participants across Europe. These participants then recommended further contacts who met the study criteria.
Data collection 
Semi-structured interviews lasting 25 to 50 minutes were conducted with each participant. An interview guide with open-ended questions regarding participants’ adventure recreation motives (e.g., ‘what motivates you to practice your sport?’; ‘why do you practice your specific sport rather than something else?’) was used to ensure consistency across interviews, while also allowing participants to expound on their experiences. Five interviewers conducted the interviews after completing supervised training, including a pilot interview with debriefing. Interviews were conducted either face-to-face (n ¼ 69) or via a web conference tool (n ¼ 15) in German (n ¼ 79), or in English (n ¼ 5) if participants did not speak German.
Data analysis 
In qualitative research, study quality depends on investigators establishing credibility and trustworthiness (e.g., Charmaz, 2014). The first step in establishing trustworthiness was disclosing investigator backgrounds (see above). Detailed descriptions of data collection and analysis are also reported to establish credibility. 2 All interviews were transcribed verbatim, with any non-verbal communications noted in transcripts. Data were thematically analyzed in several iterative stages (Braun et al., 2016) using MAXQDA Software. Thematic analysis involved (1) independent coding by two authors; (2) comparison and consensus amongst these two coders; (3) independent audit trails conducted by two additional authors; (4) comparison and consensus amongst auditors; and (5) comparison and consensus amongst coders and auditors. Step (4) and (5) were reflexive discussions which served to help coders reflect on their choices and consider the data they were coding differently. First, the first and third authors immersed themselves in the data by reading transcripts multiple times. These authors, proficient in German and English, independently coded raw data. All codes were named in English for consistency. Coders then cross-checked their analyses for agreement and accurate representation of data. Any discrepancies were resolved through discussion and referring back to raw data quotes. Following cross-checking, similar codes were grouped into themes (e.g., exploring limits and novelty grouped into challenge subtheme and overarching competence theme; see Table 2, an extension of Table 2 which includes assigned quotes is available as supplementary information). Representative quotes for each code were translated into English. Following this analysis by the first and third authors, the second and fourth authors independently performed audit trails (Corbin & Strauss, 2015) to critically review coding with reference to representative quotes. They then compared their audits and recommended improvements to codes and themes. Final consensus on the codes and themes was reached via robust, iterative discussions amongst the first four authors (see Table 2).
Results and discussion 
Data analysis yielded seven overarching themes reflecting participants’ adventure recreation motives: holistic living, emotional diversity, competence, social connectedness, nature experience, agency, and optimal mental states. Although all seven themes emerged across each distinct adventure activity, the importance and frequency of each theme varied (see supplements). Across all activities, the themes holistic living, emotional diversity, and competence were reported by the majority of all participants (>70%), while other themes were more central across different activities. For example, social connectedness was endorsed the most by freestylers (89%) and freeriders (68%), but was less important to big-wave surfers (50%), downhillbikers (55%) and BASE jumpers (50%). Big Wave surfers and freestylers (>72%) cited motives related to nature experience most frequently, whereas BASE jumpers discussed this theme least (30%). Agency related motives were reported by the majority of freestylers (83%) and BASE jumpers (60%), and by 48% of freeriders. However, this theme was only explicitly discussed by one bigwave surfer and one downhillbiker. Optimal mental states was an important motive for big-wave surfers (100%) and for 50% of BASE jumpers, but relatively fewer participants in other activities (e.g., freestylers, 28%) identified this an important motive. It is also noteworthy that although the alpinist reported on all seven themes, competence was of paramount importance to him while emotional diversity and agency motives were less critical. Contrary to some previous findings (e.g., Ewert et al., 2013), there were no notable gender differences in motives reported in the specific themes and subthemes related to each activity. This might be partly accounted for by the relatively homogenous level of experience and skill in the present sample. In previous research with professional mountain guides, for example, no gender differences were found in relation to decisionmaking although female mountain guides were perceived to have a lower risk-tolerance (Walker & Latosuo, 2016). Another study showed that male and female BASE jumpers did not differ substantively in their personality traits (Monasterio et al., 2016). However, within the subtheme excitement (see theme emotional diversity), namely in the codes positive addiction and overcoming anxiety/fear, gender differences were observed. Whereas positive addiction was only reported by men, half of the female participants but only a third of male participants reported successfully overcoming anxiety/ fear as a motivation for the activity. It is possible that overcoming anxiety/fear might be a more valuable experience for women, as the willingness to take risks is not an attribute traditionally allocated to femininity (Bem, 1974). However, through overcoming anxiety/fear and experiencing the competence to take (subjective or objective) risks, women might experience a feeling they were not socialized for, as girls are often prevented from taking risks starting early in childhood (Morrongiello & Dawber, 2000). However, these findings should be treated as exploratory, and these conjectures need to be explored further in future research.
Holistic living 
Holistic living was reflected in descriptions of how participants’ adventure recreation was viewed as a vital part of their lives. This included reports of how the activity shaped participants’ everyday lives, and lifestyle opportunities afforded by their activity (e.g., sponsorship, travel). The theme of holistic living included three subthemes: identity, lifestyle, and valued opportunities. This theme was reported by the majority of participants, regardless of activity (> 85%). Every freestyler, big-wave surfer, downhillbiker and the alpinist discussed this theme, along with 90% of BASE jumpers and 85% of freeriders. Some holistic living subthemes showed notable differences across activities, such as all big-wave surfers highlighting ‘valued opportunities’, but only a proportion of downhillbikers (55%) and freeriders (50%). While no big-wave surfers discussed ‘identity’ motives, identity motives were important for the majority of downhillbikers (91%), freeriders (63%), freestylers (78%) and BASE jumpers (60%).
It is important to note that while holistic living was widely reported across activities, it was not described as the most pivotal adventure recreation motive. With a few exceptions (e.g., rebelliousness), holistic living was reported to motivate continued participation rather than as an initial participation motive (Stevens et al., 2017). Holistic living was described in relation to participants’ overall lifestyle, rather than the immediate sport experience, and thus reflected findings linking adventure motives to ‘identity work’ or ‘serious leisure’ which can provide an enhanced sense of meaning in life (Ewert et al., 2020). 
Identity
Identity was reflected in participants’ descriptions of how adventure recreation gave them a sense of identity and purpose. Some participants explained that their activity was a big part of who they were and what they lived for, as the following quotes illustrated. “For me, BASE jumping is without a doubt my identity. It is a life dream, which I’ve fulfilled and which I’m living, and which makes me bloody happy” (BJ_02_36m). 3 This sentiment was echoed by a freerider:
Skiing is my purpose in life or always has been. The mountain has always been a great purpose in life for me. And you’ll realize it if you look at the development of how you earn your money, like now with [talking about guiding]. This is a different way of approaching the mountains or being able to stay in the mountains if the other plan [as a professional] doesn’t work out anymore. (FR_13_28f) 
Social identity has been identified as an important motive in both physical activity (Stevens et al., 2017) and climbing contexts (Dilley & Scraton, 2010). In the present analysis, identity was reflected by descriptions of the passion participants felt for their sport and how it shaped their wider lives. “So I think it is basically not just a sport, but a passion that has helped me in many situations, the normal problems in life that you have otherwise are so to speak obsolete” (FR_02_24f). 
Interestingly, big-wave surfers, freestylers and BASE jumpers, reported various reasons for not wanting to be identified as participants in their activity. Surfers and snowboarders were worried about being perceived as “posers” (e.g., “the ones who need to let other people know that they are a cool snowboarder” FS_07_24m). One surfer noted that, “surfing is full of posers … I hate it – I’ve [been] surfing for 25 years” (BW_02_32m). In contrast, BASE jumpers worried about being perceived as a psychopath, “I almost lead a double life … Many people I work with … know that I am skydiving, but they have no idea about BASE jumping. That is fine with me. I have the feeling that most people think that BASE jumpers are all psychopaths." (BJ_07_31m)
Valued opportunities
 Another subtheme of holistic living was valued opportunities, which reflected descriptions of various lifestyle opportunities afforded by participants’ adventure recreation. The primary valued opportunities were sponsorship to participate in sport, travel and earning a living through the activity as detailed in the following quotes: “It’s a great life. I can travel half of the world, get paid for expensive hotels” (FS_09_25m). “For me it is an immense enrichment of being able to earn my money with biking.” (DH_09_22m). 
Traveling to participate in the activity was another valued opportunity reported across all activities but appeared least relevant to downhillbikers (9%). In contrast, freeride and big-wave surfers reported a range of meaningful experiences connected to traveling in a unique landscape or culture to participate in their activity, as described below by a freerider:
We got to know so many interesting people through skiing [in Bulgaria], and that is also the combination of what makes it so great. Sure, you are looking for cool [ski] lines, on the other hand, you meet new people through the search and get more into the culture … skiing is not negligible, but it is only one of the components. (FR_27_23m) 
Adventure lifestyle
A further subtheme of holistic living was adventure lifestyle, which described unique motives associated with distinct adventure recreation lifestyles. Only some freestylers and, to a lesser extent, freeriders characterized recognition and rebelliousness as part of a lifestyle. “We are snowboarders, we want to stand out a bit. We are different and kind of ‘rowdies’ I would say” (FS_17_18m). “First, I was like I wanna do sick [cool] things so people think I am cool and I get sponsored.” (FR_20_31m). While these motives appeared unique to freestylers and freeriders, dedication to adventure was identified across every adventure activity. This code reflected how participants exerted considerable effort, and often made life-altering decisions, to pursue their adventure recreation above all else. As one BASE jumper noted, “I’ve sorted my life like that [to be able to jump]. I looked for a job in an environment where I could … jump more. I gave up a relationship for this [activity]” (BJ_09_33m). This freerider also described how intensive planning and preparation characterized his dedication to adventure:
This feeling, when you’ve planned [a trip] over a year and then after 10 days on the road in the middle of nowhere you’re standing on the top [of the mountain ready to descend], and at this moment you just know why you did all that shit [preparation] (FR_03_30m).
 While the latter quote echoes motives identified in endurance adventure recreation studies (Woodman et al., 2010), the motives exemplified by the BASE jumper above are less prevalent in adventure recreation literature.
Emotional diversity 
The majority of participants (>80%) identified emotional diversity as a motive for adventure recreation, although differences by activity were noted. This theme was endorsed most by big wave surfers (100%) and least by freeriders (80%). This theme reflected the wide variety of emotions experienced by participants in relation to their activity and was characterized by three subthemes: positive emotions (e.g., happiness, unique emotions, fun), kinesthetic joy (e.g., enjoyment of movement), and excitement (e.g., experiencing arousal). Within these subthemes, motives also appeared to vary by activity. For example, BASE jumpers (70%) focused more on excitement and kinesthetic joy in comparison to freestylers (28%). In addition, the alpinists’ motives only reflected the positive emotions subtheme. These data (1) extend findings from Barlow et al. (2013) and Woodman et al. (2010), which suggested that extended-duration adventure recreation participants (e.g., mountaineers) are motivated by opportunities for emotion regulation and (2) support conjectures that emotion regulation motives may be central to adventure recreation (e.g., Fru€hauf et al., 2019). 
Positive emotions
The positive emotions subtheme was reflected in descriptions of how adventure recreation made participants feel ‘good’ or ‘happy’. These emotions were often reported directly after an activity had concluded (e.g., landing a BASE jump, successfully surfing a wave), as described by this big-wave surfer: “This feeling of happiness if you’ve caught a good wave. And well, not even technically surfing a good wave, just generally the feeling of surfing a wave successfully” (BW_01_30m). Compared to the other activity groups, big-wave surfers referred to positive emotions the most (75%).
Other participants described positive emotions as a more generalized response when thinking about their adventure recreation, as this freerider reported: “It [my activity] makes me feel good, it makes me feel happy” (FR_11_27f). Beyond feeling ‘happy’, participants expressed how their adventure recreation gave them opportunities for “fun” and to experience unique emotions that were not available to them in their everyday lives. This was captured in the following quotes by a freerider and a BASE jumper, respectively: “I grew up with sports and I can show most emotions in [adventure] sports. Emotionally this gives me a lot” (FR_13_29m). “It seems that my sport [BASE jumping] gives me emotions which I’ve never experienced before. These are incredibly beautiful” (BJ_06_26m).
While study participants described positive emotions both during and after their activities, research using facial recognition software with skiers found that positive emotions almost exclusively appeared after the activity and linked it with flow theory (Hetland et al., 2018). Ewert et al. (2020) also suggested that hedonic and eudaimonic motives may be temporally linked to different adventure activity phases (i.e., during and post-activity, respectively) which was also seen in the present data.
Kinesthetic joy 
Kinesthetic joy was characterized by the enjoyment participants experienced from the physical movements and sensations involved in their activity. As adventure recreations unfold in a range of different natural environments, enjoyment of movement was directly tied to particular adventure recreation environments. For example, freeriders described the joy associated with moving through snow, while downhillbikers enjoyed the feeling of speed and BASE jumpers expressed joy when flying through the air: “The joy of flying and in fact without any device, just with your own body … or your own body defines the size of your own wings and … that it’s basically a really natural way of flying” (BJ_09_33m). Similarly, freeriders and freestyle snowboarders also described the joy associated with “air time” when performing jumps or tricks and surfers also enjoyed the “feeling of standing on the water, the dynamics” (BW_01_30m), although this theme was not as prominent amongst big-wave surfers and freeriders as it was amongst BASE jumpers, downhillbikers and freestylers.
Excitement 
The excitement subtheme was reflected by descriptions of how participants felt either before engaging in their adventure recreation (e.g., anticipation) and/or how they felt after engaging in their activity (e.g., overcoming anxiety or fear). Aside from the alpinist, this theme emerged in all activity groups.
When describing anticipatory excitement, participants often described this positively as ‘adrenaline’, but in the sense of joyful anticipation or arousal rather than fear; as this BASE jumper explained: “This [feeling beforehand] is more excitement. Of course, adrenaline, because you know something can happen, but I wouldn’t call it fear. It’s rather an excitement and joyful anticipation” (BJ_04_30m). Some participants also described these feelings as a powerful motive they linked to a positive addiction, as described by this big-wave surfer: “Surf is a drug. [ … ] When you do it at a certain level, it’s a drug. Cause when you don’t have it, you gonna miss it.” (BW_04_59m). Interestingly, no female participants linked their adventure recreation participation with positive addiction. Withdrawal states have been documented in climbers and appear more common in male climbers (Roderique-Davies et al., 2018). While the addictive potential of adventure recreation was only discussed by a few participants in this study, the literature suggests that enjoyable exercise may be protective for youth drug/alcohol relapse (Furzer et al., 2021) and adventure recreation has been suggested as a possible alternative to drug replacement therapy (Roderique-Davies et al., 2018).
Within the excitement subtheme, participants often reported that, although they felt confident they could successfully execute a certain maneuver (e.g., a jump on a downhillbike or a difficult descent on a route), that maneuver could create feelings of fear or nervousness. However, they felt excited after successfully coping with that anxiety and executing a skill, as described by this freerider: “We were in front of an icefall and that was kind of dangerous. I was really scared [to descent], but I knew that technically, with my abilities I was able to do it and when you’ve succeeded it’s great” (FR_09_26f). As this freerider explained, the continual tension between anxiety (related to doing something new and trusting her abilities) and positive feelings of excitement was an important motivating factor in her activity. Almost half of all female participants in this study (48%), but only 27% of male participants, referred to successfully overcoming anxiety as a motivating factor. Experiencing and coping with anxiety and fear in adventure recreation has also been linked to transformative experiences that foster a sense of life-fulfillment and enduring well-being for participants (Brymer & Schweitzer, 2013a). 
Competence
Competence was an important motive across adventure recreation, which was delineated into two subthemes: Challenge and mastery. Challenge reflected the importance of opportunities to experience novel challenges, such as trying new things and exploring one’s limits and new places, while mastery was characterized by narratives of (personal) achievement and improvement within the participant’s adventure recreation. Competence was discussed across all activities by the majority of participants (60%), although it was most prevalent amongst downhillbikers (91%) and least prevalent amongst BASE jumpers (60%). Within the subthemes, downhillbikers were unique in that they were mostly motivated by mastery (73%) aspects of competence and least by challenge (45%) aspects. In contrast, all other activity groups reported challenge motives more frequently than mastery, with big-wave surfers (75%) and BASE jumpers (60%) endorsing challenge motives the most, followed by freeriders (55%) and freestylers (56%). The alpinist discussed both subthemes as important motivational factors.
Challenge 
In relation to challenge, participants described how they appreciated the difficulty of their respective activities. While all participants discussed the inherent, objective risks in their activity, they viewed minimizing these risks as a form of challenge, as described by this freerider: “You always try to minimize the risk but there is always a chance that something can happen. And I guess that little chance is part of it [the motivation to participate]” (FR_11_27f). Big-wave surfers also noted the importance of challenge motives: “I don’t like sports which are really easy. I’m looking for the challenge and the difficulty” (BW_02_32m). These findings are aligned with contemporary adventure research that suggests that participants are seeking to challenge themselves in order to experience feelings of competence, rather than actively seeking heightened levels of risk to their well-being (Brymer & Schweitzer, 2013b; Kerr & Houge Mackenzie, 2012)
Another aspect of challenge included the diverse and continual opportunities for challenge within distinct adventure recreation. The novelty code within this subtheme reflected how participants were motivated by seemingly endless possibilities to explore or to learn something new in their activity, as this BASE jumper explained: 
There are so many exits [places to jump from] and things you can do. Unlike in other sports, it’s not so much about perfecting details, such as seconds or nuances. In this sport everything [e.g., the different manoeuvres] is so much bigger. And there is no end to it [the challenges]. (BJ_04_30m). 
These sentiments were echoed by a freeskier: “It’s the diversity. You can do something different every day, and you can do so much stuff that you’ll never reach the top. There is so much to learn … there are no limits” (FS_18_23f). Only one downhillbiker referred to novelty, which further suggested differences by adventure recreation within this theme.
Participants described the importance of not only experiencing novel challenges, but also of expanding perceived limits. Limits were framed as either physical (e.g., lacking skills to perform a maneuver), mental (e.g., lacking courage or mental capability), or a combination of both. One freerider described how exploring and expanding these limits was highly motivating: 
… physically going to your limits, going to the limits of what is possible. Sometimes, when I look at things I think about if I can ski that or not. At first, you think it’s not possible and then it’s possible anyway. So realizing the apparently impossible, this relocating of your limits [motivates me]. (FR_21_34m) 
Unlike most traditional sports, the challenge of adventure recreation rarely lies in defeating an opponent. As the present results and previous research implies, challenges are set by the participants within the framework of the natural environment (Fru€hauf et al., 2017; MacIntyre et al., 2019). As downhillbiking environments are often less affected by changing environmental conditions (e.g., avalanche risk, tides), these differences may explain the lower frequency of challenge in this group.
Mastery 
The subtheme mastery reflected participant descriptions of goal achievement, (skill) improvement, and competition performance. Mastery was most prominent amongst downhillbikers (73%) and to a lesser extent in other groups (<50%). Participants were motived by the possibilities for improvement in their activity, either through perfecting flights (e.g., BASE jumpers), tricks (e.g., freestylers) or improving their responses to environmental risks. As this freerider explained: “You can improve and get further. You’ll always get better. Being 30 years old, you don’t belong to the old ones yet. You still learn, you can read the environment better” (FR_04_31m). 
The code achievement reflected how participants across all activities discussed achievements they had long imagined and then ultimately accomplished. These goals were either task-specific (e.g., a freestyle snowboarding trick; a specific BASE or downhillbiking jump) or related to specific locations or events, as reflected in this freerider quote:
“For me it was always a goal to go to Alaska and in 2015 I went to Alaska with [film crew] for the first time … I couldn’t believe it. You can see the mountains and lines that you have only seen in ski and snowboard videos before and you can ride them yourself, so that was very touching and I will never forget that” (FR_26_27m). 
These findings support and extend studies reporting higher levels of competence-satisfaction amongst high-risk sport participants compared to low-risk or non-exercise participants (Woodman et al., 2020). However, the presence of both performance and wellbeing were highlighted as characteristics of thriving, which was recently explored in traditional elite sports participants (Brown et al., 2018). The findings of this theme are also supported by self-determination theory research, which has identified competence as one of three basic psychological needs (alongside autonomy and relatedness) that, when fulfilled, leads to psychological well-being and sports adherence (Ryan & Deci, 2020). While competence-related motives have been consistently identified in the adventure recreation literature (Fru€hauf et al., 2017; Jones et al., 2017; Kerr & Houge Mackenzie, 2012; Wiersma, 2014), participants in the current study suggested this motive may be more nuanced than previously discussed, particularly in terms of how it applies to distinct adventure recreation. For example, the overarching competence motive may reflect an interplay of hedonic and eudaimonic motives. In line with this approach, Ewert et al. (2020) deductively categorized ‘challenge’ and ‘(sense of) mastery’ as hedonic motives in the adventure context, whereas ‘(sense of) achievement’ and ‘personal growth’ were categorized as eudaimonic motives. In the present study, both challenge and mastery subthemes included descriptions of personal meaning that appeared to extend beyond hedonic motives. Given these tensions, future research should seek a more nuanced understanding of ‘competence’ motives in relation to distinct adventure activities and see if those are unique to adventure recreation or could be found in other leisure pursuits.
Social connectedness 
Participants described several motives rooted in social connection through adventure recreation. This was described as a sense of community, wherein people shared the same mindset, supported and motivated each other, as well as meaningful relationships, which were characterized by sharing unique experiences and having trusting relationships. Freestyle snowboarders (89%) reported this theme most, followed by freeriders (68%), while BASE jumpers, downhillbikers and big-wave surfers reported this theme least (50- 55%). There were noteworthy differences by activity in this theme with the alpinist, freeriders (45%) and BASE jumpers (40%) focused more on meaningful relationships as a key motive, while freestyle snowboarders (50%) and downhillbikers (45%) were more motived by a sense of community. Meaningful relationships was mentioned least by downhillbikers (18%) and big-wave surfers (25%).
Sense of community
Participants described the value of belonging to a group of like-minded people who shared their fascination for adventure recreation and had unique personalities. They reported having more fun and being more motivated to participate in adventure recreation when friends from this community were present. As one freerider explained: “the social aspect, that the people who practice the sport with the same intensity are also very interesting characters. I think that there is already this similarity with people who share your fascination” (FR_03_28f). This view was echoed by a downhillbiker, “Downhillbiking is like a community, a special kind of people you’re spending your time with” (DH_04_21m), and a BASE-jumper, “I am often out [jumping] with colleagues … from all over the world. Since the [BASE jumping] community is not that big, you get to know each other quite well in a short time. That’s cool when we’re on the road together in a group” (BJ_07_31m). 
The sense of community theme is supported by findings that fulfilling the basic psychological need for relatedness is essential for well-being (Ryan & Deci, 2020). It was noteworthy that gender was not mentioned in relation to social connections, which may be due to adventure recreation often being less segregated by gender than traditional sport. Thus, adventure recreation may potentially pose different opportunities for gender relations (Thorpe & Olive, 2016). Sense of community also appeared to reflect aspects of group identity, which has been linked to sports adherence (Stevens et al., 2017; Strachan et al., 2012). These social connectedness results may be particularly relevant to help address high levels of adolescent sports drop-out rates and to advance adventure recreation research with adolescents (Dahl et al., 2018).
Meaningful relationships 
This subtheme encapsulated the importance of special friendships formed through adventure recreation. Aside from big-wave surfers, every activity group discussed the importance of having friends with whom they could share sports experiences. The code sharing unique experiences reflected reports that adventure recreation experiences were more valuable when shared with good friends. The alpinist noted that this motive had become increasingly important over time: “Now I have the feeling that it [my motivation] changed a bit throughout the last years. It’s not as important anymore where, how difficult, or what [you are climbing], but who are you climbing with and with whom you travel” (AL_01_34m). Another code, trusted friends, was largely unique to freeriders, as expressed in these quotes: “the special thing is, you have your trusted people with whom you go on the mountain. They are trusted people because you expose yourself to a certain risk … that’s a very beautiful friendship, which just makes a big difference (FR_21_34m).” “[Trust] plays a big role … when I am skiing exciting descents … It has to be a like-minded partner … Then I can do more extreme things … Those friendships become more intensive and more valuable than other acquaintances (FR_25_41m). Trusted friends may be a more important motive for freeriders due to avalanche risk, in which partner rescue is crucial for survival (Procter et al., 2016). 
Nature experience
Nature experience was identified as a motive across all adventure activities. Big-wave surfers reported this theme the most (75%), followed by freestylers (72%) and freeriders (65%). BASE jumpers reported nature experience less frequently (33%) than other groups. Adventure participants reported feeling deeply connected to nature when engaging in their activity, as described here: “First of all I am driven by the mountains, nature; I feel connected with nature” (FR_09_23m). Participants also reported being motivated to experience the natural beauty and, sometimes, solitude. Interestingly, descriptions of how participants experienced nature were unique to each adventure recreation environment, as reflected here: “I love the water, I love nature. This is an environment where I feel at ease, which I enjoy, which feels natural. … sport activities which take place in nature suit me generally.” (BW_01_30m) 
The desire for solitude in nature, a code within this theme, was only mentioned by a few participants and initially appeared to conflict with social connectedness motives. However, solitude reflected a different motivational dimension which did not preclude the importance of social connections. For instance, the alpinist described the equal importance of social connection and solitude, depending on the situation, as he explained here:
When I am free-soloing, which is … maybe the most egoistic discipline in mountain sports, then I have this ability to flip the switch and then, suddenly, I am … not the person anymore for whom it is important to go with other people. In this case, I am suddenly totally in the foreground … I find both [social connection and solitude] equally important. (AL_01_33m) 
These results suggest that drawing on frameworks linking nature connectedness and psychological well-being may provide promising avenues through which to refine adventure recreation models (Houge Mackenzie & Hodge, 2020; MacIntyre et al., 2019). Such refinements may better reflect participants’ lived experiences and enhance our understanding of how adventure recreation may enhance psychological well-being.
Agency 
This theme reflected participants’ valuing of autonomous decision-making, as well as opportunities to be creative or to be one’s ‘true self’ in their activity. While not all participants elaborated on each of these aspects, all reported loving the feeling of freedom their activity gave them, as described by the following downhillbiker and freestyler, respectively: “Freedom. Most important thing is freedom” (DH_03_19m). “Snowboarding means being free” (FS_16_26m). Brymer and Schweitzer (2013b) also identified distinct aspects of freedom (e.g., freedom from constraints, freedom of choice) in a qualitative study of adventure experiences.
The majority of freestylers (86%), followed by BASE jumpers (60%) and freeriders (48%), reported agency motives. Agency appeared less important for downhillbikers as only one downhillbiker discussed this aspect of freedom. Participants valued feeling autonomous, especially when comparing adventure recreation with traditional sports (e.g., soccer, ski racing) they had practiced before starting their adventure activity, as discussed by this freerider: “There are no rules and regulations, [whereas] when you go [ski racing] you always have to practice to be fast. In freeskiing it’s free and you can do whatever you want” (FR_05_27f). Studies have identified agency as being closely connected to emotion regulation in adventure contexts (Barlow et al., 2013; Woodman et al., 2010). However, agency appeared less important for downhillbikers in the present study, which might be explained by more limited route choices in this context.
The code comfortable in your own skin described how participants felt at ease with themselves in adventure recreation, as reflected in this freerider quote: “I was being bullied in school and found myself at the mountain, this is my happy place” (FR_04_24f). In addition, the alpinist talked about how his activity was a place where he felt comfortable and how it helped him overcome challenges in everyday life: “In the early years [climbing] was always the thing that saved me during the daily routine over the week … I was always looking forward to the weekend when I could climb again because it was always something where I knew that I’m good at it and that I liked doing” (AL_01_31m). 
Only freeriders and freestylers explicitly identified opportunities to be creative as a participation motive. They described this in terms of creative freedom to try ‘tricks’ with their own style or to find a creative new ‘line’ down a mountain, as explained below: “Because I don’t have any musical abilities and I’m not creative in painting, I can live my creativity through my sport” (FS_02_24m). “You can let your creativity run free.” (FS_08_25m). This finding presented a novel contribution to the literature as creativity has not been explored as an adventure recreation motive. However, as this motive appeared to be unique to some groups (i.e., freeriders, freestylers), future research should further investigate this motive in relation to diverse adventure recreation.
Optimal mental states 
Opportunities to experience optimal mental states were identified as a motive across all groups, although the importance of this motive appeared to vary across activities. For instance, all big-wave surfers discussed this motive whereas freestylers discussed this motive least (28%), The prevalence of this motive in other activities ranged from 36% to 50%. Narratives of ‘being in the moment’ or ‘escaping everyday life’ and problems through their adventure recreation reflected this theme. 
Being in the moment
Some participants explained how objective risks in their adventure recreation forced them to focus on the present moment. They reported how it was often dangerous if they were not completely focused on what they were doing, and how they often became completely mentally absorbed in their activity. One big wave surfer described this as a primary surfing motive: 
First you get nervous, but you don’t realize it, cause you’re always super focused … Everything goes automatically … You don’t think, you feel it … It’s a tricky mind thing, that’s why we like this kind of sport … You take your mind to a journey somewhere, where it gets lost. (BW_04_59m) 
Participants in other activities offered similar descriptions, such as this downhillbiker: “This is the only way I am focused … it is just about the moment … you have to be completely there” (DH_08_25f). This was echoed by a freerider: “Satisfied, I stop thinking.” (FR_13_29m). A few participants explicitly described this as ‘flow’; “Whether it’s surfing or freeriding, it’s always this ’flow’ feeling which I’m looking for. But it’s nowhere as intense as in flying” (BJ_07_31m). Although only few participants explicitly named ‘flow’ as a motive, descriptions of how participants were focused and immersed in the moment often mirrored flow state descriptions in the adventure recreation literature (Boudreau et al., 2020).
Escape 
Participants described how their activity allowed them to mentally escape from everyday life. This escape brought relief from everyday problems and cultivated inner calmness, which was often experienced as relaxation after their activity. These feelings were either described during the activity or as a feeling of satisfaction after the activity, as reflected in quotes below: “It [freeriding] has helped me in a lot of situations. The normal problems you have in life don’t matter … up there” (FR_02_24f). “Water [is] … my place where I find this inner peace” (BW_01_30m). “Whenever I had a great day at the mountain, I’ll come back completely satisfied and reset” (FS_05_25m). 
Strength and limitations 
The strengths of this study include (1) in-depth qualitative data from a large number of participants; (2) highly skilled and experienced participants across a range of distinct land, air, and water-based adventure activities; (3) analysis of data at both the activity level and overall data set to identify differences and commonalities across distinct adventure activities; and (4) a rigorous analysis process involving two coders, two auditors, and on-going iterative critiques of data coding and analysis. Notwithstanding, these results may be limited to highly experienced adventure recreation participants and/or participants from these specific adventure activities. For example, while Fru€hauf et al. (2019), found no motivational differences in recreational and professional freeriders, other studies suggest that emotion regulation capabilities may vary across novice and experienced skydivers and BASE jumpers (Meyer et al., 2015) and that eudaimonic motives may vary by experience levels (Ewert et al., 2020). Thus, the current findings should be evaluated across a broader range of adventure recreation activities, and amongst less experienced participants in different contexts.
Conversely, it is possible that these findings may not be unique to adventure recreation, but may also be present across populations engaging in other high-performance activities (e.g., other nature-based leisure pursuits; traditional competitive sports participants [Brown et al., 2018]). These propositions could be explored using exploratory sequential design principles (Plano Clark et al., 2008; Tashakkori & Teddlie, 2010). For instance, a subsequent quantitative study comparing motives of participants with similar sociodemographic backgrounds across adventure and non-adventure activities, or a nested design mixed-method study examining these motives across groups, would identify the degree to which the current findings are unique to highly skilled adventure participants. Finally, the backgrounds of the investigators (e.g., psychology, adventure recreation, sport) may also have led to overlooking alternative interpretations of the data, although a robust analysis process involving four investigators was used to reduce this issue.
Conclusions and future directions 
The present study revealed seven themes as motivational factors in six, environmentally and skill-related different adventure activities which can be understood as eudaimonic (e.g., holistic living, social connectedness, nature experience) and hedonic motives (e.g., emotional diversity, competence, agency, optimal mental states). These findings extend prior research in this area (e.g., studies by Ewert et al. (2020); Monasterio and Cloninger (2018)) by illustrating the complexity of adventure recreation motives within and across diverse activities in highly skilled and experienced adventure participants. Specifically, these findings suggest that while participants share some core motives (e.g., holistic living), the prominence of these motives may vary across adventure activities, and how they are experienced may also vary across groups (e.g., nature experience in big wave surfers compared to BASE jumpers). 
Future research should account for the heterogeneity of diverse adventure recreation pursuits in data analysis, rather than homogenizing participants, and present results in relation to specific adventure activities. Results also reflected the importance of examining eudaimonic motives in adventure recreation, which supports emerging frameworks (Houge Mackenzie & Hodge, 2020) and refutes a number of traditional conceptualisations that have posited a narrower range of hedonic motives (e.g., risk and thrill-seeking) for adventure recreation (Kar & Tarafder, 2020). These findings suggest that adventure recreation motives should be more broadly conceptualized in terms of multiple eudaimonic and hedonic motives in future research and that researchers should also examine a wider range of hedonic motives (e.g., positive emotions beyond excitement). Identifying a range of adventure motives might be especially important to inform broader public health applications of the potential of adventure recreation (Clough et al., 2016). Further investigating these findings in direct comparison to highly skilled participants from non-adventure-based sport and leisure pursuits could also clarify whether or not the motives identified herein are unique to adventure populations. This fruitful avenue of future research would also help to further integrate what have traditionally been relatively siloed areas of research (e.g., adventure activities and traditional sport), but which may increasingly overlap as new adventure disciplines proliferate.
This study has important implications for how we theorize and research adventure recreation experiences. Given that some participation motives for adventure appear to vary by activity, and that many participants emphasized the importance of motives beyond risk and thrill (e.g., eudaimonic motives, meaningful relationships, sense of mastery and agency), drawing on and further developing psychological models that reflect these findings can inform and advance future adventure recreation research.
