The views from the hills: fatal accidents, child safety and licensing adventure activities
Two recent fatal accident inquiries (FAIs) in Scotland have potentially far-reaching ramiﬁcations for educational provision across the whole of the UK. The deaths of two teenage children during the course of outdoor adventure activities led the sheriff in one of those inquiries to recommend a review of the regulatory framework which governs those activities. This call for an across-the-board review means the outdoor education sector – which includes organisations which provide outdoor education for schools groups as well as those offering more adventurous experiences for children outside term time – is now likely to face a degree of scrutiny greater than any it has experienced since the 1993 Lyme Bay disaster.
This paper draws upon research interviews with those who work in outdoor education in some of the more remote areas of Scotland. The data from those interviews indicate that some of the issues that ought to be considered in any such review will not be immediately apparent from reading either the fatal accident inquiries’ determinations or the literature which is available either on the Heath and Safety Executive’s website or otherwise in the public domain. In particular, it appears that some issues which have only reached a wider audience by virtue of these FAIs have actually been the source of longstanding concerns among the stakeholders, dating back to the mid-1990s when the regulatory framework that came into being in the wake of Lyme Bay was still under discussion. This paper therefore uses the interviewees’ responses to help develop a greater understanding of the issues that exist in this particular sector and to illustrate the legal and logistical challenges that it faces.
INTRODUCTION
 ‘A comprehensive review by the Health and Safety Executive is an appropriate way to address the concerns about the legislation that arose in this inquiry.’ Sheriff Johanna Johnston QC, June 2010.
2 Legal Studies
In the wake of the Lyme Bay disaster in 1993, there emerged a considerable body of academic and practitioner-oriented literature which focused on how the risk of fatalities and injuries has inﬂuenced educators’ willingness to engage in outdoor educational activities and their preparation for them. Lyme Bay, along with fears of the putative ‘compensation culture’ pervading education, has meant that the edicts of health and safety law have become an important consideration for teachers and education authorities who ultimately make decisions about pupils’ participation in outdoor activities that are intended to enhance their education (or which, very occasionally, are offered to children primarily for recreational purposes). However, there has been less consideration of how this framework has impacted upon the centres that are licensed to provide those activities, whether in the form of outdoor education properly deﬁned or as ‘fun’ activities that do not speciﬁcally address any curriculum requirements. For the majority of these providers, catering for schools’ curriculumoriented needs represents their largest single source of income, but this is often supplemented by, and in some cases supplanted by, the provision of one-day or residential courses that are offered on a purely commercial basis outside of term time and which have less of an overtly educational component. Such courses can be problematic because ‘many of the serious accidents to schoolchildren have occurred on visits not associated with the curriculum’, but it is increasingly difﬁcult for a sole operator or small business to operate successfully if they concentrate exclusively on the outdoor education market: if favourable weather could be guaranteed many providers would expect to make more money during the summer months from their purely commercial operations than they would from catering for schools. But favourable weather cannot be guaranteed, state schools do not offer outdoor education to the extent that many interested parties would like to see and outdoor educators in the far north of Scotland face particular challenges. Approximately 15% of these business across Scotland employ no one other than the owner, while others will recruit employees on ﬁxed-term contracts for the summer season and thereafter will engage the services of self-employed instructors for a month, a week or a day in order to serve whatever market the weather and the economic climate affords. 
Seven semi-structured interviews9 were conducted by the author with outdoor education providers in February/March 2008. All of the participants either owned, or were the senior managers of, outdoor activities centres located in the Northwest Highlands of Scotland. The research was broadly concerned with the relationship between these providers and the Adventure Activities Licensing Authority (AALA), which was established in the wake of Lyme Bay and which, in 2007, was subsumed into the Health and Safety Executive. AALA oversees the operations of those activities providers which offer designated activities to young people – namely, the pursuits of watersports, caving, trekking and climbing which, in the wake of Lyme Bay, were deemed to be activities particularly susceptible to the risk of large numbers of casualties arising from a single incident. However, the AALA regime operates in addition to both the general health and safety provisions that impact upon all outdoor activities providers (whether AALA-registered or not) and the licensing requirements of individual local authorities. It is thus an additional tier of regulation rather than an entirely separate framework which has exclusive authority for the licensing, regulation and oversight of businesses that operate in this particular market. The perceptions of this small number of interviewees have yet to be tested by reference to a wider body of stakeholders, so one must necessarily be wary of ‘trying to make too much’ of the data, and this paper does not provide consideration of all the substantive legal concerns which arose, including liability in delict, contractual issues, child protection concerns and several obscure-but-important provisions such as who can drive a minibus and for how long. However, they are discussed here because of their potential to offer important insights into the relationship between these aspects of juridical ﬁeld and the educational ﬁeld at a time when that relationship is destined to come under close scrutiny as a consequence of two recent fatal accidents. 
THE FATAL ACCIDENT INQUIRIES
In 2006, 15-year-old Laura McDairmant died during a residential outdoor activity week in Barcaple, Dumfries & Galloway. The activities were provided by the Abernethy Trust,  which is a large, well-established AALA-licensed provider that owns four residential centres across Scotland. It provides both AALA-regulated and non-regulated activities in a Christian environment and caters both for outdoor education and the holiday market. The Trust had repeatedly acknowledged its own shortcomings over the incident and, in 2008, it was ﬁned £16,000 in respect of its breaches of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, ss 3 and 33. 15 When the FAI’s determination was ﬁnally released at the end of June 2010, 16 the ﬁndings were even more damning than the adventure activities sector feared, and they potentially have long-term implications for the whole industry.
Laura was participating in a residential course offered during the school holidays. She sustained catastrophic injuries while gorge jumping from a ledge 9.5 metres above the water. There was an outcrop of rocks below the water’s surface and participants had to execute a technically sophisticated manoeuvre in order to avoid both the outcrop and another ledge that protruded from the gorge on the way down. Laura hit the ledge and died ‘as a result of hypoxic brain damage due to injuries to her face and neck due to a fall from height’. The noted that speciﬁc instructors’ qualiﬁcations in gorge jumping and gorge walking are not available from any national sports governing body18 – the appropriate qualiﬁcation is one that is available for mountain guides or mountain instructors, but that qualiﬁcation is only applicable to gorge activities if the activity involves the use of climbing equipment or requires the skills of a rock or ice climber, and what was offered at Barcaple did not involve that equipment or those skills. Consequently, gorge jumping at Barcaple was not an activity ‘designated’ under the AALA regime so it was not inspected by the licensing authority. There was no other national governing body award that could be objectively regarded as evidence that the holder was competent to offer that activity to children, and although the activity could have been inspected by the local authority by virtue of its powers under the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 and attendant Regulations, Dumfries & Galloway Council had a policy of not inspecting activities providers who were inspected by AALA. 19 However, that probably made no difference because for several years the instructors who ran the activity had circumvented the trust’s (very weak) health and safety procedures and had actively sought to ensure that neither the senior managers nor the trustees, the AALA inspectors or the local authority had cause to know that this activity was being provided. There had been no meaningful sitespeciﬁc risk assessment 20 and (as had been the case at Lyme Bay) concerns about the activity had been raised by two temporary instructors in the summer before the accident, but these had been ignored.
The McDairmant inquiry bears uncomfortable comparison with the FAI into the death of Kaylee McIntosh, aged 14, who drowned while on an Army Cadet Force (ACF) expedition on South Uist in 2007. Here, children were sent onto a sea loch without there being a proper appraisal of the weather conditions, which were bad and not forecast to get any better. The ACF used an over-loaded vessel that was patently unﬁt for purpose and the children were equipped with lifejackets designed to be worn by adult male soldiers carrying 45 kg of equipment rather than 14-yearolds. All this was compounded by a failure to provide the coastguard with accurate details of where the accident had occurred. There was no headcount immediately after the accident and the alarm was not raised until 90 minutes later when the ofﬁcers ﬁnally realised Kaylee was missing. One particular ofﬁcer had failed to reveal to her rescuers that Kaylee was unaccounted for even though, just as she was about to make good her own escape, she had promised Kaylee she would ‘come back for her’. Having taken a year to consider that inquiry’s ﬁndings, the Crown Ofﬁce announced on 3 May 2010 that Northern Constabulary and the Health and Safety Executive were ‘exploring further lines of inquiry’, 23 the clear implication being that prosecutions could ensue.
When one considers the potential criminal legal ramiﬁcations of such incidents, the Lyme Bay tragedy in 1993 is invariably the ﬁrst point of reference. Four teenage children in a party of 15 died from hypothermia while trying to canoe across a bay on the South coast of England in March. As with South Uist, weather conditions were adverse. There were strong offshore winds but the children had been told to wear nothing but swimming costumes underneath their wetsuits. When the canoes capsized neither the party members nor their three inadequately trained instructors knew how to inﬂate the lifejackets properly and their ﬁrst aid and safety equipment was inappropriate anyway (no whistles, no distress ﬂares, not enough lifejackets), but because the centre manager lied to the rescue services about the party’s proposed route, several hours elapsed before they were located. Although Lyme Bay led to the UK’s ﬁrst successful corporate manslaughter prosecution, 24 it is not the most appropriate comparator for South Uist in particular because, prior to the Lyme Bay accident, there had been clear warnings from former employees about the persistent health and safety breaches perpetrated by the manager and staff. Those concerns had been communicated directly to the company’s owner, hence the corporate manslaughter conviction, 25 but no such concerns had been raised in advance over the ACF ofﬁcers’ activities. Lyme Bay’s similarities with the Barcaple debacle are superﬁcially stronger because in that case former employees had indeed raised concerns with their line managers, but it is a matter of conjecture whether these had made their way to anyone who could be regarded as a ‘controlling mind’.
A better comparator for both is an incident in May 2002 when 10-year-old Max Palmer drowned while ‘plunge-pooling’ (jumping from height into a natural pool) during a school trip to Glenridding Beck, Cumbria. Max was a primary school child who had gone on a secondary school trip because his mother was a parent-helper. The party was manifestly ill-trained and ill-equipped for the venture and Max drowned after getting into difﬁculties in a fast-ﬂowing body of water that was stated by his rescuers to have been ‘as cold as the English Channel in February’. The teacher in charge of the course (who had lied on his job application about his outdoor activities qualiﬁcations) 27 had decided to continue with the activity even though his group had passed, en route to the venue, a party from another school whose teachers said they were not going to do plunge pooling because the Beck was in full spate and it would be far too dangerous. Max’s teacher had said they would be OK because they had a rope with them, but he had left the rope at the hostel and Max was dead by the time he was pulled from the river by pupils assisted by the teachers from the other school party (who were properly trained and equipped). The teacher was sentenced to 12 months’ imprisonment after pleading guilty to a charge of manslaughter (the trial judge, Morland J, described his decision to let the activity go ahead in the prevailing conditions as ‘unbelievably foolhardy and negligent’)  and the Health and Safety Executive report indicates that, like Barcaple, there had clearly been deliberate attempts on the part of the activity leader not to comply with health and safety requirements.
However, that report also illustrates the complexity of the health and safety regime that governs outdoor activities, and the weaknesses it revealed had still not been addressed at the time of Kaylee and Laura’s deaths. It had not been difﬁcult for the teacher to avoid scrutiny of the activities he was undertaking and there had been no proper risk assessment of either the plunge-pooling activity or this individual’s capability and qualiﬁcations in respect of it. Unlike the Barcaple incident there had been no attempt to hide the fact that the activity was occurring (the school actually used a photo of plunge-pooling on the explanatory brochure it sent to parents), and the Glenridding report identiﬁed virtually the same concerns about the confused roles of various health and safety actors that were later noted by the Sheriff at the Barcaple inquiry. If one reﬂects upon both South Uist and Barcaple in the light of Glenridding rather than Lyme Bay, then the Crown Ofﬁce’s announcement that prosecution could arise out of South Uist should occasion little surprise; and it is not beyond the realms of possibility that some time in 2011 there will be a similar announcement in respect of Barcaple. It is also clear that the problems with the regulatory framework which Sheriff Johnston identiﬁed could have been addressed several years previously.
Undoubtedly, there are lessons to be learned from both these FAIs, but it should also be remembered that, statistically, these activities are very safe indeed. There is certainly no evidence that AALA-accredited providers are less safe than nonaccredited ones and it is a truism that the most dangerous aspect of these activities is the journey to the venue. 29 Every year more than 50 people are killed on the roads of Aberdeenshire alone30 and the rates of serious injury sustained in the course of off-site school activities simply do not bear comparison with, say, injuries in schools’ rugby matches, but prior to the Barcaple incident no child had died while under the supervision of a Scottish outdoor activities provider since 1971, when ﬁve young people and their instructor died from exposure while climbing Cairn Gorm in blizzard conditions. 32 That incident led to radical changes to the instruction of outdoor educators across Scotland, culminating in dedicated college courses and a great deal of ongoing training being available for teachers and activities centre staff. 33 Perhaps that direct consequence of the Cairn Gorm tragedy has contributed to the enviable safety record which has existed in Scotland since. Most of the injuries that have occurred have been sustained outside the scope of the activity itself and are usually a consequence of general foolhardiness on the part of the children – ‘ﬁngers slammed in doors, running in the corridors, throwing stones and the like’ to quote one of the interviewees – or of teachers wanting to get involved but forgetting they are not as ﬁt as they were and sustaining an injury: ‘the kids end up getting frustrated and the quality of the session isn’t as good if you have to stop because Sir’s hufﬁng and pufﬁng and has blown his knee out’.
While there have been deaths in the course of outdoor educational activities in England and Wales since the 1995 Act came into force, none have involved failures on the part of AALA-accredited providers like the Abernethy Trust – they were all a consequence of wilful health and safety breaches by school and college teachers34 and they would probably have been avoided if the risks inherent in the activities had been properly assessed and managed by the responsible adults according to the 1974 Act and the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999, SI 1999/3242. 35 The McDairmant inquiry clearly shows that AALA is not perfect, but these children have died because individual instructors failed in their duty towards them. Any deliberations on AALA’s ﬁtness for purpose should proceed on the clear understanding that, as with Lyme Bay itself, all these children were let down by adults who chose to circumvent their legal obligations.
THE AALA REGIME Prior to the Activity Centres (Young Persons’ Safety) Act 1995 coming into force and the inception of the Adventure Activities Licensing regime for which it made provision, the health and safety aspects of outdoor education fell within the ambit of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 and the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1992, SI 1992/2051. 36 The 1995 Act did not render those provisions inapplicable but introduced another tier of regulation in respect of activities providers who offer one or more designated activities to children and young people. In order to obtain a licence from AALA, 37 a commercial provider or a local authority-owned centre which offers one or more of caving, climbing, trekking or watersports activities to unaccompanied38 people aged 17 or under must comply with what are now the Adventure Activities Licensing Regulations 2004, SI 2004/1309. 39 Compliance with the 2004 Regulations is deemed to connote ‘compliance with nationally accepted standards of good practice in the delivery of adventure activities to young people, with due regard to the beneﬁts and risks of the activity’.
The 2004 Regulations are primarily concerned with the mechanics of the initial licence application and its subsequent renewal or revocation, and with any appeals pertaining to those decisions. They are largely silent on the health and safety standards that AALA-registered providers actually have to abide by in respect of those activities, reg 6 simply providing that an applicant for a licence must have ‘made a suitable and sufﬁcient assessment of the risks to the safety of the young persons’; must have identiﬁed the control measures that need to be taken to ensure their safety so far as is reasonable practicable; and have ‘appointed competent persons to advise him on safety matters or has competence in such matters himself’. It also states that no decision on granting a licence shall be made until a report by ‘a person authorised for that purpose’ has been considered by the authority. However, ascertaining precisely what an activities provider has to show in order to satisfy the inspector then requires recourse to the Health and Safety Executive’s own guidance document 42 – and in turn that document gives away very little, save to say that ‘the licensing is founded on assuring good safety management’ and: 
‘The licensing authority will assess whether the provider has a systematic approach to the management of safety, including the implementation, monitoring and review (see also paragraph 18) of the control measures taken to control risks – ie an overall culture of safety.’
It further provides that ‘the licensing authority will have regard to other relevant general guidance issued by the Health and Safety Commission (see further reading)’ and ‘the licensing authority will also have regard to guidance in the publications of relevant (national governing bodies) where that guidance is relevant to the safety of participants’. This is a daunting regulatory framework that activities providers whose skills and passions lie elsewhere must understand in order to get their licence, and one interviewee voiced the opinion that ‘although I’ve got a raft of qualiﬁcations . . . that allow me to take all these groups out I haven’t got a raft of administration qualiﬁcations to go with them . . . If I hadn’t had other providers (to talk to) I’d probably not have bothered (applying)’.
To further confuse matters, both the Barcaple FAI and the Glenridding HSE report show how different health and safety powers are vested in different entities, and there is clearly the potential for some roles to be duplicated while others are not carried out at all. The physical inspection of designated activities is conducted on AALA’s behalf by the Adventure Activities Licensing Service (AALS), and in Scotland this effectively means it is carried out by one of two men who visit sites, observe the conduct of activities, look at the paperwork detailing risk assessments and instructors’ qualiﬁcations and write the reports that inform AALA’s decision on whether to grant a licence or renew an existing one.
‘Normally they follow an audit trail approach. Depending on how the weather is when they come here we will decide what is going to run and they will choose to follow a particular member of staff on a particular activity, follow that person out and watch not only the gear that they use but also the safety and the style of teaching and all the rest of it. When they get back they will say “show us the evidence of that person’s qualiﬁcations on their ﬁle” and follow the rest of that up. People just accept that as part of the job and we occasionally do our own internal veriﬁcation too – one of my jobs is to just watch staff work from time to time, particularly the newly-inducted. If it’s their ﬁrst 2 or 3 sessions I will just go and watch.’
If a centre only offers activities which are not ‘designated’ it does not need an AALA licence and consequently it does not have to be inspected by AALS. If it offers both designated and non-designated activities (as is the case with the Abernethy Trust) it does require inspection and a licence – but only in respect of the designated activities which it offers. There is no formal licensing and inspection requirement for that centre’s non-designated activities even though designated and non-designated activities are often offered to the same children on the same day and probably by the same instructors, who usually hold instructors’ qualiﬁcations in a multiplicity of disciplines and can thus lead several different activities with the same group. Inspection of the non-designated activities falls within the local authority’s remit, 43 but even in respect of the designated activities, AALA’s powers are limited because it ‘has no statutory enforcement powers and no immediate power to prevent an activity from continuing’ 44 – the enforcement of all these aspects of health and safety law is likewise within the purview of the local authority. The sheriff at the Barcaple inquiry noted that ‘there is no system in place to ensure that a local authority is made aware of the adventure activities which are not the subject of inspection by AALA and for which the local authority retains responsibility for inspection’. 45 As South Uist graphically illustrated, it is perfectly possible for non-commercial providers to avoid inspection regardless of the activities they offer, and activities considerably more dangerous than the ones the 1995 Act designates likewise fall outside AALA’s remit because ‘the deﬁnition of adventure activities has not been ﬂexible enough to encompass a number of new and potentially risky activities’. 
It has taken the deaths of two teenage children to bring this lacuna to the attention of a wider audience, but those working in the industry have clearly known about it for many years:
‘If somebody chose to be a cowboy they would be and AALA wouldn’t change that – you’d just not be able to take unaccompanied under-18s into the sticks. You could still take them scuba-diving, driving quad bikes – far more dangerous things than going walking or biking more than 2KM from a road or anything else that AALA covers.
I took over here just when AALA started. Everyone in outdoor activities was a little confused when AALA happened. We all knew why it happened, because of Lyme Bay. But the legislation was then, and still is, very confused and very difﬁcult for people to understand. There’s another sailing club on this loch – same boats, same water, sometimes the same instructors that I use, but they don’t need a licence because they’re not (a) commercial (provider).’
This ‘commercial’ element is problematic because it means that voluntary associations such as the Air Cadet Force are not subject to the 1995 Act – and neither are schools that offer such activities to their own pupils. This explains why neither the South Uist nor the Glenridding trips were covered by AALA (although the councilowned outdoor centre used in the latter case was AALA-licensed). Perhaps one of the issues to consider in the wake of all these incidents is whether it should be the nature of the activity, rather than the legal status of the undertaking which provides it, that determines whether licensing is appropriate. Of course this could have very signiﬁcant ﬁnancial implications for organisations which are presently exempt, but if the intention is to make children’s activities safer one needs to consider all the situations in which children have been exposed to unnecessary risks and respond appropriately.
Some of the interviewees had clearly doubted whether the activities of one rogue operator at Lyme Bay had really merited the imposition of the AALA regime, and it was evident the confusion surrounding AALA’s roles and those of local authorities had long been a concern.
‘You’ve got all this inspection and it interferes with what you’re doing. I’d like to see AALA being more proactive and that becomes the end of the story – no governing body accreditation, no local authority visits so AALA does everything. Why do you need another layer of bureaucracy? Why waste time and money on copies of risk assessments, more inspections, ﬁlling in forms, when everybody agrees it’s important to give more kids the opportunity to spend more time outside?
Some [councils] ask to see our risk assessments and I say “are you sure?You can, but if you choose to accept it you share the responsibility”. Others just ask, “do you have a risk assessment?” but they don’t actually want to see it! So the councils are backing off from that – they will still ask for copies of my insurance, but not the other documents anymore. They just want to ask the question and get the answer. Some say they want to be able to carry out spot-checks, which is up to them. When you are an approved provider you play by that council’s rules, not AALA’s, not the [sports’] governing bodies’, not anybody’s but that council – the activity, the [staff–child] ratio, the qualiﬁcations you need, whatever the council says, goes. Now, most of the [councils’] rules are the same as the sport’s governing body’s, which should be the same as AALA’s. So why am I ﬁlling all this in when AALA are there? There’s a lot of duplication.
We tick boxes for AALA . . . I was one of the two Scottish representatives on the Parliamentary select committee to give evidence when they were developing the framework. My colleague at the time said . . . that the legislation was using a sledgehammer to crack a nut, and it was the wrong nut. That’s how I still see AALA. I don’t think they’ve made us any safer – they are an expensive and bureaucratic procedure to go through.’
And although it ostensibly provides a degree of security for those who participate in potentially dangerous activities, AALA accreditation, of itself, does not facilitate access to the regulated activities ‘market’. As the interviewees intimated and the Barcaple inquiry conﬁrmed, individual local authorities have their own procedures that operate in addition to those imposed by the licensing authority and an activities provider needs to satisfy the requirements of the former as well as those of the latter. For some local authorities, the AALA regime will provide as much evidence of a safety culture as they feel they need, but, for others, AALA is almost an irrelevance. Over-regulation is an unnecessary burden and an additional expense, but Barcaple conﬁrms the perception that some providers, and some speciﬁc activities, can avoid licencing altogether:
 ‘There are activities not licensed by AALA at all. Archery, for instance. Their governing body gives guidance on good practice and they train archery instructors, award their qualiﬁcations, so you would need to train your instructors to that standard and use their procedures, build that into your procedures. But AALA wouldn’t be involved in that part of your operation. And if a school was sending its children to do any activity the local authority would look at your operating procedures, they will have an outdoor activities co-ordinator whose job it is to make sure that any outdoor activities are done to their requirements, and that’s on top of the AALA rules, the sports’ rules and whoever else is trying to make money from us.
With Aberdeen Council, to be an approved provider I have to send copies of all risk assessments and procedures, which are supplied to AALA anyway. I had to increase my insurance coverage from £2m to £5m and I had to ﬁll in a twelve-sheet form, supply it to them [and it] was checked by their advisor. So now, I’m an approved provider. With the Highland schools AALA is the end of the story so long as nothing goes wrong. Edinburgh, the other LEA where I work, wants AALA, a two-page form ﬁlled in, operating forms and risk assessments supplied to them, and they want to come up and inspect me themselves although I’ve had an AALA inspection. I would imagine there are people who’ve thought “I can’t be bothered. I won’t work with that council, I won’t bother with AALA, I won’t offer that activity”.’
If there is to be a review in the wake of Barcaple, local authorities will come under pressure to inspect activities providers to a much greater level than most do at the moment. This may even extend to inspecting physically every site where an activity takes place, possibly with inspections taking place during the currency of the activity and regardless of whether that means duplication with theAALAinspectors’ role. That may oblige local authorities to ensure that the task is carried out by people with their own degree of expertise (‘at the moment it’sjust a council desk-jockey . . .’;‘there’s not always much expertise about the industry . . . unless you’re dealing speciﬁcally with the specialist outdoor education ofﬁcers that do have that expertise’) and the close relationship between theAALS inspectors and the centres(‘it’s a trust thing . . .’)is also likely to be scrutinised. Any review is also likely to be concerned with the degree of cooperation and mutual understanding on the part of councils, AALA and the wider Health and Safety Executive, and it may call for greater clarity about where the divisions of responsibility lie. The Glenridding inquiry drew attention to the beneﬁts of local authorities having a ‘suitably experienced’ outdoor education adviser (perhaps similarto the ones who trained in Scotland in the 1970s and 1980s) but who ‘might need to obtain advice from specialistsin connection with particular activities’.  Thisreﬂects the interviewees’ perceptions that the local authorities’ role is often a static one which relies too much on being satisﬁed that the paperwork is in place, with active oversight being left toAALA. In principle, this approach could have merit because overseeing the paperwork requires different skills to overseeing instructors’ ability to engage in a dynamic risk assessment which takes into account changing weather conditions, the attitudes and maturity of the participants or simply a conﬁdence in their own competence. Reforms that would result in clearer lines of communication betweenAALAand local authorities, with the former taking responsibility for what occurs in the ﬁeld and the latter taking responsibility for the no-less-important task of overseeing the documentary evidence, might thus be worthy of consideration. It could also alleviate concerns that the relationship between the inspectors and the activities providers they oversee is a little too familiar and would beneﬁt from oversight by a third party. In any event, there is little merit in a system where two or more people look at the same paperwork but nobody actively investigates what occurs when a centre takes children gorge jumping or engages in other non-accredited activities.
At the Barcaple inquiry the sheriff noted that Dumfries & Galloway Council ‘operated a policy of not conducting planned inspections of a provider of adventure activities if that provider was inspected by AALA . . . their inspections were conﬁned to the premises and grounds at Barcaple’. The sheriff asserted that this was in part because the Council erroneously believed it was not legally entitled to inspect sites that were not physically located in the Council’s area, and while this merely causes more confusion because both the site of the accident and the location of the activities centre at Barcaple are indeed in the same county, 49 it reinforces the extent to which there had been inadequate communication between the council and AALA and the lack of basic knowledge over who was legally responsible for what. The sheriff also noted AALA had not furnished the Council with the reports of those inspections which had occurred50 but, again, this would have made little difference given the steps taken by the instructors to conceal the provision of gorge jumping. ‘It would only have been by chance that an inspector might have come across the activity during an annual inspection’ 52 but, as with Glenridding Beck, the lack of communication made the subterfuge easier to sustain.
None of this should deﬂect from the high personal regard in which the individuals in Scotland who carry out the inspections required under reg 6 of the 2004 Regulations are held:
 ‘The inspectors up here – I know them both very well and they are both personal friends, they are colleague-ly, amicable chaps.
They’re both really helpful, fantastic guys [and] place a lot of emphasis on sharing best practice between providers. They take a very practical view of the safety side and realise that systems that are appropriate for some providers aren’t appropriate for others.’
However, there may well be a legitimate view that this relationship is too close to enable AALA to carry out its role properly. While their ability to secure the stakeholders’ support for the AALS regime through their experience and understanding reminds us that the juridical ﬁeld’s encroachment into ﬁelds such as education is particularly effective ‘when both the dominant and the dominated classes believe that the existing order, with perhaps some marginal changes, is satisfactory’, 53 their failure to note the absence of the appropriate paperwork was deemed to be an important contributory factor to Barcaple.
 THE SCHOOLS MARKET IN DECLINE If Sheriff
 Johnston’s recommendations come to fruition, any review of outdoor education regulation will take place against a backdrop of ever-declining participation through schools. The state funding of education faces a very signiﬁcant reduction across the UK in the years ahead54 and there is no statutory requirement to provide outdoor education beyond what is deemed necessary for ﬁeld trips in discrete subject areas such as geography. 
AALA accreditation is not cheap. ‘Along with nuclear power and the oil industry, adventure activities is the only one that pays for its health and safety inspections’, and in October 2008 the licence fee increased from £640 to £715, 55 which is either an annual or a bi-annual payment depending upon the size of the undertaking. Although this was the ﬁrst increase since 2004, the fees in place at the time of the interviews were already a source of grievance and the imminent increase was perceived as a potential disincentive for providers to continue offering the regulated activities. None of those interviewed were contemplating withdrawal from AALA at the time, but the option of extending their portfolio in order to provide popular programmes like the Duke of Edinburgh scheme was simply not ﬁnancially viable for those interviewed. To the contrary, some interviewees gave the impression that, even though they are clearly providing a service that schools and their pupils want to access, they would join the growing band of operators who have withdrawn fromAALA if only they could be sure of successfully attracting other groups:
‘We’ve had to change our client proﬁle. Instead of working predominantly with state children from Edinburgh we’re going further aﬁeld, and we’re also relying more on the private sector schools – not just from Scotland but from across the UK.
I know of two centres up here that have stopped offering anything to kids because of the rising costs. When they hiked the price up to £640 they said “it’s not worth it”. They were getting kids in – they had regular schools that were going every year – but combined with a rise in insurance it just tipped the balance.
Duke of Edinburgh? I don’t do it, it doesn’t pay . . . Occasionally people will ask if I can do the hillwalking and I think about what I need to do, risk assessment, needing overnight instructors, and I’ll say “OK we can do it for £600” and the groups is, like, err, no, it’s only three kids for one night. But they’re thinking I can do it for £25 per child.’
These undertakings operate in locales where ‘our strength is our location, and our weakness is our location’, so the opportunities afforded by the physical environment have to be viewed against the challenges posed by the difﬁculty in accessing those locations. ‘Take a two-hour drive south of here and you’re still well north of Perth’, as one of them said, so it is impossible to have children from Scotland’s main population centres travel to these locations, participate for a reasonable period of time in an activity and then travel home on the same day – and most of the educationally valid activities that schools and parents would feel comfortable in offering to their charges can be achieved in far less remote, and far less physically daunting, environs much closer to home:
 ‘The problem with secondary kids is the schools all pick the same weeks. Last week in May, I’ll need nine instructors. The following week, when the exams are on, there’s nothing. In late May every activity provider will be full . . . but after that it’s very slow and we can’t do anything with [English] schools to ﬁll the gaps. That’s partly geography, we’re too far north and you’d drive past dozens of other places before you got here. So June is often very quiet, usually just adults and the odd local school.’
Declining participation levels are not a new phenomenon, however, and they are not simply a matter of geography. In the 1940s, education legislation had encouraged the increased use of the outdoors for educational purposes, and during the 1960s and 1970s many education authorities established their own residential bases so that they could offer courses where classrooms and all the necessary equipment was on site and there was no need to pay commercial rates for accommodation and meals:
‘In the 70s outdoor education was seen as being a Good Thing and Edinburgh Council was at the forefront of that, almost a world leader. When I started I was a biology teacher but after two years I became an outdoor education teacher – I had no timetabled teaching, I’d just extract children from the classroom and take them out. That was just in one school, and there were people . . . in the other schools who also did nothing but outdoor education.’
But by the 1980s and 1990s, funding cuts meant that outdoor education was often seen as a dispensable luxury. Local authorities’ centres have either closed or are increasingly required to operate on a more commercial footing, and very few state schools retain an outdoor education programme because, along with other non-core subjects such as art, drama and music, funding from central government has been cut dramatically. 57 While it may still be the case that ‘the great majority of school children in Scotland will receive outdoor education as part of their curriculum’ 58 those levels are declining, schools are under no obligation to make that provision and, because parents/carers have to pay, children from poorer backgrounds are far more likely to miss out even when providers cut their costs as much as possible: 
‘One of the problems with the kids is that providing a child with a day’s activities, well I can’t ask more than £25-£35. Get the adults in and (I can charge them) £60 a day no problem. Now, outdoor instructors come at a given ratio, set by the insurance people, and while they aren’t always insisted upon for the adults they are insisted upon by AALA and the schools and LEAs. So I need an instructor for every eight kids. So that’s eight adults at £60 a go or eight children at £25 a go . . . As a commercial provider do I charge (the children) what I should charge to make a living, or do I charge something else which makes it attainable for the kids?
Local authorities are saying that because of lack of cash they’re not funding anything that isn’t statutory, and given the tendency to devolve everything down they’re saying that outdoor education is something that has to be funded by the schools themselves. So from 2010 we will get a zero budget and we will have to generate everything we need to survive. So this used to be a heavily-subsidised service targeted at the children who most needed it and now it’s become something that children have to buy into, very sadly.’
While it is clearly appropriate for schools and education authorities to have ﬂexibility in how they deliver education, it does mean that markedly different approaches can be discerned in different areas so that, to quote one of the interviewees, ‘kids on Orkney spend an average 4 or 5 hours a week in out-of-classroom learning; kids in some parts of Glasgow spend a minute and that includes residential experiences’.
The framework for education in Scotland’s state schools is now set down in A Curriculum for Excellence (ACE), which was initiated by the previous Labour administration in Scotland and ostensibly addressed the perception that educational achievement is measured only by academic attainment, with little acknowledgment that not every child responds well to school and that ‘success’ can take other forms. 59 The present (SNP minority) administration regards ACE as indicating how education in Scotland is both independent from, and different to, that which is available in England. 60 Any initiative that addresses the disadvantages notoriously inﬂicted on the members of Scotland’s lowest socio-economic groups would be warmly welcomed, but the underlying principle of ACE is that educational provisions should be less dictated by central government and local authorities should be at liberty to determine what works best in their particular schools. Consequently, ACE does not lay down prescriptive, enforceable statutory requirements and the absence of a statutory right to outdoor education is therefore consistent with the philosophy that underpins education provision generally; but it means that what is available will be vulnerable to any future reforms, cuts in spending or changing priorities among individual schools or local authorities. At the moment outdoor education in Scotland is affordable to most families despite the regulatory burdens, and one rather suspects that many activities providers make a loss on what they provide to schools but hope to recoup it from holiday activities and other courses; ut it will remain a challenge to persuade schools, local authorities and parents that outdoor education is a worthwhile enterprise when there are cheaper, and no less educationally valid, alternatives. Any regulatory changes that compound ACE’s failure to guarantee that all children will have these opportunities will merely reinforce the fact that, in Scotland, outdoor adventure activities remain an essentially middle-class enterprise.
A recent report to the Westminster Parliament indicated that, in England and Wales, the provision of outdoor education (broadly deﬁned in the report to include all out-of-school educational activities) is in no better shape. The report found that provision is: 
‘extremely patchy, largely because of a widespread perception that there was a high degree of risk involved in offering such opportunities. Cumbersome bureaucracy and issues of funding, time and resources were also found to lessen schools’ commitment to providing opportunities for learning outside the classroom.’
Despite various initiatives, there has been no discernable increase in the number of schools in England and Wales that offer learning opportunities outside of the classroom. Only half of all pupils are offered day or residential trips to the countryside during the school year, 64 and one suspects that the recently introduced provisions which prevent teachers in England and Wales from covering for colleagues who take children on such trips will have a detrimental impact too.  The Westminster Report also noted (in another reﬂection of the Scottish position) that ‘some schools and groups of pupils still have particularly poor access to learning outside the classroom. These include schools in less afﬂuent areas, pupils with special educational needs, disabled pupils and pupils from low-income families’.
THE FUTURE REGULATION OF AALA
 On 21 October 2010 a Private Members Bill which proposed the abolition of AALA received its formal ﬁrst reading in the House of Commons. 67 The Bill is one of several ‘health and safety’ proposals advanced in the 2010/11 Parliamentary Session by Christopher Chope MP, but his lowly standing in the private members’ ballot means it stands very little chance of becoming law even if the proposal itself were uncontroversial. That said, it is a truism that Private Members Bills at least provide an opportunity to draw attention to issues of concern even when they have no realistic possibility of success, and Mr Chope’s initiative might help secure the wider inquiry into AALA’s work that Sheriff Johnston has called for.
If that inquiry does ensue, then rather than merely trying to secure its continued existence perhaps AALA’s advocates could consider lobbying for a new, more clearly deﬁned remit which replaced local authorities’ role in respect of activity centres’ compliance with health and safety law. There is an argument that in order to prevent particular activities ‘slipping through the net’ AALA should have exclusive jurisdiction over all these centres, regardless of the precise nature of the activities they offer, or their commercial status, or whether the activities have been offered in the course of an educational activity or not. AALA was speciﬁcally established to prevent mass casualties resulting from a single incident which might occur in one of a small handful of particularly high-risk activities which have been offered by a commercial activities provider, and to that extent it has proved successful. It was never intended to supplant the more general health and safety requirements that might have prevented the fatalities at Glenridding, South Uist, Barcaple and elsewhere if only the adults in charge on those occasions had paid attention to what the law required and had done their job properly. AALA is not without its ﬂaws, but calls for its outright abolition do not address the concerns that have been articulated by the real experts in the ﬁeld.
This ﬁeldwork has suggested that the interviewees’ reservations about the health and safety framework had preceded Kaylee’s and Laura’s deaths by several years. Having AALA accreditation and a desk full of risk assessments is no safeguard against the stupidity of individuals, but AALA’s own website seems almost deliberately to give the impression that participating in these activities carries undue risks68 and it will fall to others to argue that outdoor education and adventure activities are both thoroughly worthwhile and comparatively safe. They are not a panacea and these activities clearly carry risks that other out-of-school activities lack, but these risks are effectively managed by hundreds of schools and providers across the UK on a daily basis. Outdoor education’s advocates will certainly need to show how outdoor education can help attain educational targets in a way that justiﬁes the inevitable expense and disruption for the staff members involved; they need also to show that these activities can be taken without exposing children to undue risks; that it can be an inclusive activity; that ‘proper’teaching time will not be eroded; and that the burdens which will necessarily be placed on colleagues are not unreasonable.
On a theoretical level, these FAIs can be regarded as presaging new developments in the ongoing juridiﬁcation of educational and leisure practice. ‘Law . . . can at times be very distant from the everyday, while in other ways it is embedded in everyday experiences . . . irrelevant to our lives and centrally implicated in the way those lives are organised and lived’,  and the recent tragedies may ultimately lead to a more pronounced role for the juridical ﬁeld and a more burdensome health and safety regime that practitioners will be obliged to accept with greater or lesser degrees of reluctance. However, one wonders whether the Health and Safety Executive really is the appropriate body to carry out that review, given the role that the Health and Safety Executive has played in these tragedies. The Barcaple inquiry suggests that the Health and Safety Executive is part of the problem rather than being the appropriate authority to identify the solution.
However it proceeds, the review should ensure that there is a voice for the outdoor education providers and the teachers and local authorities who are routinely castigated when accidents occur. The views of parents, children from low-income backgrounds and those with disabilities who already face particular difﬁculties in accessing outdoor activities should also be heard, and it is by no means obvious that leadership of the review should necessarily fall to those with legal expertise and the concomitant power to ‘translate the discourse into a legal one and thereby attempt to capture it, the appropriation effect in Bourdieu’s terms’.  One wonders whether the review would not be better entrusted to those with real competence in the ﬁeld, with what Bourdieu calls ‘a feel for the game . . . a mastery acquired by experience’  and possessed by those who are steeped in the outdoor education culture, such as the one that developed in Scotland in the wake of the Cairn Gorm disaster in 1971 and which exists no longer.
CONCLUDING THOUGHTS 
Perhaps the most striking issue to arise from these research interviews was the extent to which they suggest that some individuals or groups of people (be they qualiﬁed instructors, school teachers or volunteers with the Army Cadet Force) who work together, train together and probably socialise together can develop a legal consciousness of their own, and one so strongly underpinned by an unshakeable conﬁdence in their abilities that no degree of top-down regulation will easily undermine it. One wonders how frequent are the occasions when the rules are not quite followed but no one is any the wiser because nothing untoward happens, or how often potentially dangerous activities go ahead even though nobody was qualiﬁed to lead them, or how frequently a particular course of conduct which would have made children safer is circumvented because it was considered to be more trouble than it was worth. Did the instructors at Glenridding Beck, South Uist and even Barcaple genuinely feel the activity could be safely undertaken because they had complete conﬁdence in their own abilities and believed the kids would be safe if they followed their instructions? If such perceptions are shown to have been widespread within the industry, will that alter the tenor of any review, or do the circumstances that have given rise to it mean the review is already destined to result in an ever-more stringent regulatory framework that some individuals will always seek to circumvent because it cannot be reconciled with their own perceptions of their role? ‘Avoidance and resistance do not challenge the existence of juridiﬁcation; indeed, they can be seen as juridicatory effects themselves, but what they do contest is the assumption that change occurs in the form law or its “masters” intends.’ 73 Stakeholders in any ﬁeld will have their own strategies for making sense of the law, and it would be dangerous to assume that these tragic accidents will occur with even less frequency if the regulatory burdens are enhanced with no thought as to how good practice can be continually reinforced in the workaday habitus of the individual practitioners.
If the juridical ﬁeld is to have any answers to the questions deemed to exist after Barcaple then there needs to be, in the ﬁrst instance, an appreciation of what might have inﬂuenced the practitioners to act as they did. What happened at Barcaple in particular was almost certainly a grotesque exception to a culture in which the environment is respected and the need to balance the risks against the potential rewards is properly understood by the stakeholders, and the interview responses certainly suggest that there is a genuinely safety-conscious climate to which those incidents are the tragic exception; but what if the responses of seven people who were willing to talk about their practices are less indicative of what actually happens in the ﬁeld than are the views of the 20-odd people who declined to participate? One must always treat research of this nature with the utmost caution, for one would not expect people who have things to hide to acquiesce to an interview with a stranger. Hopefully, there are not too many activities providers who have said (in effect) to a local authority inspector, ‘you really don’t want to see my health and safety records’ and maybe there are few other providers who genuinely believe that the accreditation of instructors is just a money-making enterprise for sports’ governing bodies, but any review will need to establish whether there is a need for reform of the existing regime or whether, for example, enhanced education and continuing professional development for those working in the ﬁeld is a more effective way of dealing with the issues that Sheriff Johnston has raised. It is a cause for concern that the Health and Safety Executive has already been identiﬁed as the appropriate body to carry out what would be, in effect, a review of the Health and Safety Executive’s own provisions and practices.
Finally, the putative ‘right to education’that is advanced inArt 2 of Protocol 1 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 1950 is formulated in such negative terms that it cannot possibly be read as placing signatory States under an obligation to provide anything akin to outdoor education in the sense under discussion here, and it is clearly not a ‘right’ but a privilege which is increasingly becoming the preserve of children educated in the private sector and those whose parents are fortunate enough to have money to spare. But outdoor education is educationally signiﬁcant and those who would argue the case for it must be prepared to show how it has beneﬁtsthat no other educational opportunity can offer. Many of us will look back on residential tripsto the hills and the lakes with varying degrees of fondness; but even if outdoor education has provided warm memories, that does not mean it was more educationally beneﬁcial or ‘worthwhile’ than a less-hazardous activity would have been. It is often the case that ‘teamwork’ and the supposed ‘personal’ and ‘social’ beneﬁts of these activities are unproblematically offered as evidence of their validity – that it must, almost by deﬁnition, be ‘character building’for children to get cold and wet while pursuing an activity that most would never dream of undertaking if left to their own devices – but when schools’ curricula are already overcrowded, resources are becoming ever-more scarce, parents’ and schools’ perceptions are negative and there is no legal provision which demands their inclusion, such assumptions have little to commend them.Adventure activities providers themselves are best placed to show that what they offer contributes to the wider curriculum – for example, by showing how it facilitates an awareness of a community and its history, or how it reﬂects the scientiﬁc, environmental and geographical aspects of learning. It is difﬁcult to do this if the wider perception of outdoor education is of using a pretty landscape to provide the backdrop for a recreational activity – giving pupils the opportunity to ﬁre a bow, paddle a kayak or ride a mountain bike somewhere different so that the pursuit, rather than the environment, isthe focus of the activity. 75 If that perception holdssway, it becomes easy to argue that whatever educational outcomes have been achieved could also have been attained in the playground or the classroom with far less investment of time and resources because the boundary between what is outdoor education and what is essentially a sporting activity will have been crossed.Butregardless ofthe form that any review takes or how ‘outdoor education’is deﬁned within itsremit, itshould proceed on the clear understanding that these pursuits have much to commend them, that AALA is not without its merits – and that children have died not because any aspect of the health and safety regime was manifestly wanting, but because of failures on the part of the adults who were supposedly responsible for their well-being.
