Active older adults in adventure education: how their experiences can influence outdoor adventure education program opportunities KEYWORDS Active; adults; baby-boomers; experience expectations; motivation ABSTRACT By 2029, 20% of the U.S. population will be ≥65-years-old. American demographics are changing, understanding of the ≥65-year-old demographic has not. We investigated expectation variables of participants born between 1946 and 1964 in the United States, and identified how expectation trends have changed over time also describing gender differences. We used secondary data from a motivation study published in 2015 to identify the expectations of active older adults. Four years of data were used (n = 71) in a self-selection of four adventure activities (rock climbing, flat-water canoeing, white water kayaking and sea kayaking). Older adults expected experiences in the natural environment, with social factors, and where they were either starting a new activity, or honing acquired skills. They were not focused on danger or the use of personal gear. We recommend programming that caters to an aging population, as well as considerations for gender. Introduction The notion of an older adult, who after working hard at a career, one relaxes into their ‘golden years’ is popular. This implies a misunderstanding of the kind of expectations toward life experiences or, experience expectations, of the U.S. population ≥65-years-old (Ewert, 1983; McLean, Hurd, & Brattain Rogers, 2005; Brennan, 2008; Kleiber, Walker, & Mannell, 2011). This age-group is comprised of people born from mid-1946 to mid-1964, who are in the age range of 45 to 65, and are known as the ‘baby boomer’ generation at the time of data collection (Colby & Ortman, 2014; Hogan, Perez, & Bell, 2008). McLean et al. (2005) agreed with Ewert (1983) that the changes in the nature of the working environment and the shifting age demographic have produced a progressively large population of ‘older adults who have the time, energy [ability], and wherewithal [income] to pursue leisure interests’ (Ewert, 1983, p.64; Parks, Evans, & Getch, 2013). Gilbertson and Ewert (2015) suggested that the more experienced the participant the more complex their motivations, these motivations are ‘related to personal growth and aesthetic factors’ (p. 94). Due to the size of this generation, as they retire a major sociological shift is occurring (Brennan, 2008; McLean et al., 2005). This shift is anticipated to be a more active population evidenced by the differences in overall health and nutrition, active lifestyles and medical advances (Sugerman, 2000). Their transition to retirement and what types of activities they will be seeking as older adults is beginning to reveal a misunderstanding of this generation’s expectations on aging. Ewert, Gilbertson, Luo, and Voight (2013) collected data indicating that three influencing factors emerged: social, sensation-seeking and self-image, and that data revealed ‘significant differences regarding activity type, gender, and experience level’ (p. 91). A study conducted in 2003 by Sugerman found that older adults may be preparing emotionally for life after a career by using outdoor adventure activities as a way to assist with that transition. Within the context of adventure programming, Ewert (1983) first identified, and supported by Sugerman (2000, 2003) and others, that baby boomers’ desires for structured outdoor educational programming have been largely ignored (Ewert, 1983; McLean et al., 2005; Brennan, 2008; Kleiber, Walker, & Mannell, 2011). Without paying attention to what motivates the baby boom generation to participate in structured outdoor programs, there becomes a programmatic risk of missing a large and important opportunity to engage one-fifth of the U.S. population (Brennan, 2008). What has not been explored is the experience expectations of active older adults and what sorts of structured programs can meet these expectations. Gilbertson and Ewert (2015) concluded that there is a need for institutions to move beyond offering adventure programs primarily as risk experiences and to allow for a wider variety of outcome experiences in outdoor adventure programming that includes considerations for gender differences. These outcomes are referred to as experience expectations within the context of outdoor adventure motivations. What is not known are the specific experience expectations by older adults who wish to participate in outdoor adventure opportunities. Thus, the purpose of this research was to examine the motivations or, experience expectations, of older adults who have participated in adventure education activities. Research questions ● RQ1: What are the experience expectations of active older adult participants who participate in adventure education programs? ● RQ2: What are the trends in the experience expectations of active older adult populations who participate in adventure education programs? ● RQ3: Is there a difference between genders of older adult participants in adventure education programs? Background Guiding foundational theories for this study are: adult learning theory (Merriam, 2001), age stratification theory (Riley, 1971), activity theory (Lemon, Bengtson, & Peterson, 1972; McGuire, Boyd, & Tedrick, 1999), motivation theory (Ewert et al., 2013; Ewert & Hollenhorst, 1989; Gilbertson & Ewert, 2015), self determination theory (SDT) (Ryan & Deci, 2000), flow, serious leisure (Stebbins, 1979), trends in outdoor programming (Attarian, 2001) and the role of adventure education and tourism (Pitman, Broomhall, McEwan, & Majocha, 2010). Each of these theories helps to better understand how and why a person chooses to participate in outdoor adventure activities and programs. Cumulatively, they suggest that a person has a set of experience expectations that motivates them to participate in various types of outdoor adventure activities. These expectations include skills development, social expectations, seeking challenge and self-improvement. Motivation Defining expectations of experience in adventure education comes with some inherent challenges. Motivation in itself seems to be an ever-evolving target that generates a multitude of theories. Those challenges were identified as five distinct variables in determining the motivations of adventure participation in Ewert et al. (2013). They are: ● The ‘fluid nature’ inherent in motivation (How stable is the motivation(s))? ● Is there an influence of the level of experience? ● Do motivations vary by different activity types? ● Is there a different motivational influence between genders? ● Which is more valued, developing a new experience base, or having a prior experience with an activity? (p. 94) Ewert et al.’s (2013) study concluded that participants in outdoor adventure activities tend to have multiple motivations; their motivations do not seem to vary by experience level; that the type of activity chosen does influence ones’ motivation to participate (e.g. canoeing/sea kayaking tends to be more social than rock climbing); Women tend to desire a more social experience than men; and, motivations for a new versus a prior experience tend to shift with age (e.g. older tend to seek novel experiences). Flow in context of expectation Whereas anxiety might lie on one end of a spectrum of experience, and boredom on the opposite flow would occupy the middle within a range called optimal experience (Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 2014). Flow theory in the context of motivation during an experience occurs when thoughts, intentions, feelings and all the other senses are focused on the same goal. Thus, energy flows and the tasks almost feel effortless. This suggests that one would be motivated to build upon prior experience to achieve an effortless feeling. Thus, flow theory aligns with the Ewert et al. (2013) findings. Self-determination theory in context of expectation Ryan and Deci (2000) state, ‘Self-Determination theory (SDT) is an approach to human motivation and personality that uses traditional empirical methods while employing an organismic meta theory that highlights the importance of humans’ evolved inner resources for personality development and behavioral self-regulation’ (p. 69). Self-Determination theory addresses intrinsic and extrinsic motivations; divides them into smaller concepts and includes the mental space occupied by the participant. Thus, SDT suggests that a person may be either extrinsically or intrinsically motived to participate in an activity, which can be socially influenced. Again, SDT supports the findings of Ewert et al. (2013) by indicating that there are multiple expectations, especially including socially based participation, for selecting outdoor adventure programs. Serious leisure in context of expectation Stebbins’ 2015 research has identified six distinct qualities ‘that give the concept of serious leisure… important breadth of scope’ (p. 256). Of those six qualities there is a greater focus on the fourth—the quality of Durable Benefits. Eight durable benefits (Stebbins, 1979, 1980, 1982) found by amateurs in their various pursuits: ‘self-actualization, self-enrichment, recreation or renewal of self, feelings of accomplishment, enhancement of self-image, self-expression, social interaction and belonginess (sic), and lasting physical products of the activity’ (p. 257). These benefits have become common motivational variables in contemporary studies such as Gilbertson and Ewert (2015). Educational constructs Adult Learning Theory is a foundation of Adult Education (AE). Adult education has existed for approximately 150 years, but has lacked a systematic framework such as what exists in P-12 education. Stubblefield and Keane (1994) wrote, ‘Activities grew out of the efforts of individuals to improve themselves in various ways’ (p.1). In 1936, Bryson defined AE broadly as, ‘all activities with an educational purpose that are carried on by people engaged in the ordinary business of life’ (p 3–4). The role of outdoor adventure education becomes relevant in this context. Pitman et al. (2010) studied adult learning and educational tourism in Australia. They found three key ideas in JOURNAL OF ADVENTURE EDUCATION AND OUTDOOR LEARNING 161 adventure tourism: First, participation was intrinsically intentional; second, it had a strong experiential component; and third, there was an element of structure, which included things like daily themes, or lesson plans. Further, Sjögren and Stjernberg (2010) found that outdoor recreational physical activity has restorative effects on one’s well-being. However, the type of marketing of such activities may not be adequate because they overlooked the older adult age group (baby boomers) that this study has focused on. Social demographic changes In the book Leisure and Aging, the authors point out that there is knowledge, but not understanding of American societal demographics, especially with this older demographic (Nimrod, 2008; McGuire, Boyd, Janke, & Aybar-Damali, 2013). For example, what are perceptions in differences of what retirement is or will be like for the baby boomers versus that of the previous, silent generation (McGuire et al., 2013)? Baby boomers are living longer, don’t like to be labeled as ‘retired’ or ‘elderly’ and plan to keep working at least part time after their first career (as cited in Parks et al., 2013). Age stratification theory provides insight into how age plays a role in experience expectations. This theory posits that each age group has their own way of interpreting social meaning, structure and change (Foner, 2010). Meaning, there appear to be differing experience expectations per generation which, for the purpose of this study, is the baby boom generation, or older active adult. Outdoor industry trends Through identification of participant trends outdoor providers can market and develop programing that meets the needs of outdoor enthusiasts (Outdoor Foundation, 2010, 2015, 2017). From the perspective of the adventure industry this makes financial and social sense. The adventure industry has a great and timely opportunity to serve the largest demographic shift in United States history (McLean et al., 2005). Because of this changing generational shift, the expectations and opportunities for the active older adult are beneficial to identify. Buckley (2012) stated, ‘The motivations of adventure tourists are significant for tourism both as a category of human behavior (sic) and as a trillion-dollar global industry’ (p. 961). This notion supports similar findings by Attarian (2001); Myllykangas, Gosselink, Foose, and Gaede (2002). The Outdoor Foundation, a non-profit organization established by the Outdoor Industry Association, identified trends by activity in participants from the years 2006 to 2009 the time period in which the original data was collected (Outdoor Foundation, 2010). Of significance is the shift of participant age. In 2010, 34% of the population participating in outdoor activities were 45+ and in 2017, that number grew to 37%. This trend supports the premise of this study. Methodology The design of this study used secondary data analysis (Creswell, 2001). Data were collected by Ewert et al. (2013). A sample was taken from the original data that was collected from six years (2000, 2002, 2003, 2006, 2007 and 2008) with an original sample size of 801. The sample for this study used participants in the upper age-range (45–68 years old) totaling a samples size of 71. In the original study, participants self-selected to participate in a range of outdoor adventure activities that ranged in skill levels (beginner to advanced), activity types (rock climbing, sea kayaking, flatwater canoeing, and white-water paddling). There was also an overall balance of genders (female = 316). An outdoor educational program located in the Midwest United States was selected because it provided all of the above opportunities. Participants were from throughout the United States, including Alaska, with an age range of 13–68 years old. Surprisingly, while many agencies and institutions in the United States offer all of the activities and skill levels included in the original study, no other similar institution offered the range of activity types and skill levels 162 G. J. PETRY AND K. GILBERTSON within the same agency at the time of the study. Because of the plethora of studies in adventure education that are limited to college students, this study intentionally omitted any adventure programs that were part of a college course for credit. Thus, because the original study sought to determine trends in motivation over an 8-year time period using the same activities and skill levels, it was not feasible to reliably use multiple study sites with varying activity types and skill levels. Finally, because the original authors were seeking subjects who were intentionally participating in structured outdoor adventure programs, a control group was not pertinent to the study. Analyses consisted of descriptive statistics that summarized the data and identified expectations by gender, activity type, and skill level. Multiple regression analysis identified which expectational factors explained why active older adults participated in adventure education program experiences. These expectations were charted to determine the extent that they changed over the data collection period (i.e., trend analysis). Results Figure 1 illustrates the distribution of age demographics. The populations of each age group were: 45–50 years old (n = 26, 36.6%); 51–55 years old (n = 29, 40.9%); 56-years old (n = 11, 15.5%); 61–65 years old (n = 3, 4.2%) and 66–70 years old (n = 2, 2.8%). Females accounted for 28% of participants (N = 20). Further examination of data found that in every age group the male population had more representation. Active older adult females were only represented in the first three age groups, 45–60 (combined) years old (28.2%) (see Figure 2). Finally, Figure 3 identifies the kinds of activities chosen by respondents by age group. After using descriptive statistics to summarize the data by gender, activity type and skill level, a Pearson Correlation Coefficients Procedure identified which expectations were correlated. Third, a Principle Component Analysis and an Exploratory Factor Analysis was used to reduce the data into summarized sets of measures. These measures were then run through a Varimax Rotation in order to limit correlations and produce a simple structure that created distinct factors. These distinct factors were the final determination of which factors explained why active older adults participate in adventure education program experiences. These expectations were charted to determine the extent that they changed over the time span of the data collection period. Data indicated that active older adults did not fluctuate in their expectations. Thus, the trends remained stable except the variables of participating to ‘show control’ declined across all years while the expectation variables of doing something out of the normal routine, doing something novel and exhilaration showed an increase. Danger showed an increasing trend starting in the year 2006. This makes sense in that often times when people are doing a new activity that they feel less in control and their perception of danger is increased. Finally, these data were further separated by gender finding that both active older adult males and females reported expecting the natural environment and novel activity. Canoeing and climbing had similar participant numbers between genders, however, whitewater was predominantly male, and sea kayaking was the activity chosen most by females. This supports the original study’s gender results in that males were more motivated by sensation seeking activities, and females were motivated more by social activities. Summary This study attempted to identify and explain the expectations of the upper age range (45–68 years old) that participated in adventure education activities. This study was based on the Gilbertson & Ewert’s study: Stability of Motivations and Risk Attractiveness: The Adventure Recreation Experience (2015). Of the original 45 expectational variables, 19 expectational variables emerged to be the most significant explanations on what motivates active older adults to participate in adventure education activities. The literature explored topics that have an extensive history of research reaching back to the early 1900’s, and identified a growing demographic shift of historical proportions as most baby boomers will be retired by 2029. Their impact on the outdoor recreation industry will affect how businesses market, develop and implement adventure education programming. Understanding motivational theories and frameworks that encourage active older adults to participate in adventure education programming can better prepare these programs to offer services that meet these experience expectations. These findings can help to better address how to meet these increasing demands for outdoor adventure opportunities. This study focused on the upper age-range (45–68 years old) in order to answer the following three research questions: ● RQ1: ‘What are the experience expectations of active older adult participants who participate in adventure education programs?’ ● RQ2: ‘What are the trends in the experience expectations of active older adult populations who participate in adventure education programming?’ Table 1. Factor analysis with orthogonal and oblique varimax rotation final communality estimates. Factor Analysis with Orthogonal & Oblique Varimax Rotation Final Communality Estimates: Total = 15.50 High Variables of Expectation Goals 0.94 Test (Self) RQ3: ‘Is there a difference between genders of active older adult participants in adventure education programming?’ Discussion This study had a total of 71 respondents separated from the original 801 respondents. To describe the population in this study demographics of gender, skill level, activity and age ranges were used. Age distribution was very left skewed which put the majority of the population between the combined age range of 45–55, with the highest number of participants in the age range of 51–55. Demographically, at the time of data collection the age range 45–55 was the baby boom generation. This generation has had more encouragement of leading active lifestyles through their careers, so it makes sense that they would continue habits created over that time. However, it can be said that all of the participants in this study are active older adults. Future studies will need to address, as Riley (1971) points out, these findings may be more generalizable when applied to the social construct of what defines a ‘generation’ (baby boom), than expectations being simply dictated by age. This study supports Sugerman’s motivational research on Elderhostel participants (2002). RQ1: What are the experience expectations of active older adult participants who participate in adventure education programs? Through Final Communality Estimates (FCE) this study lists the expectational variables: meeting personal goals, to test themselves, value of activity and setting and a sense of accomplishment, as high variables of expectation. This echoes one of Stebbins’ (1982) quality of serious leisure: durable benefits. Active older adults expect programing that offers achievable goals that challenges and tests skills and abilities that they value. The FCE of the intermediate variables are close in values to the high variables of expectation. The intermediate variables are: Working as part of a team, doing something that was out of the routine, being around friends, a sense of challenge, the opportunity to for skill development, an activity that was novel, to be able to interact with others, to have a sense of control, takes place in the natural environment and having a feeling of exhilaration. This list of expectational variables suggests connections to the social elements of being part of a group, the excitement of doing something new, and a chance to build on-or-acquire new skills within a natural environment and that participants have influence over the adventure education programming. The FCE in both rotations identify that the expectational variables of having a sense of danger and being able to use their own gear are low variables of expectation. This age group is likely experienced enough to understand the degree of danger presented to them and chose to engage in a risk level that they are comfortable with (rather than ‘proving’ themselves). Likewise, this age group more likely has the wealth and experience to possess the requisite equipment, which likely explains why this item scored low. The varimax rotation adds to the list of low variables: As a way for self-expression, to be known as a climber/kayaker/canoeist, and to show others how/or that they can perform a task, which indicates that active older adults in this sample are choosing activities based on the equipment they already own, and are interested in rediscovering their identity through the activities. However, these are not primary expectations. RQ2: What are the trends in the experience expectations of active older adult populations who participate in adventure education programs? Every collection year shows a general decline in participation of active older adults as they increase in age. The Outdoor Foundation (2010) data from 2006 to 2010 indicates a predicable decline in participation that is congruent with age. This does not reflect what Sugerman’s 2000 study found where ‘…the greatest numbers of individuals over 50 participating in outdoor adventure activities 166 G. J. PETRY AND K. GILBERTSON was in the age range of 60–69’ (p.14). However, national trends reported by the Outdoor Foundation (2015), identified 37% of older adult population, were active in the 45+ age group. This indicates that trends are remaining consistent. The study also lumps the entire population into a single age group, but still represents over a third of a population that remains active. The Outdoor Foundation (2010) stressed the importance of a history of being active in their goal to ‘…ensure a healthy outdoor population’ (p. 8). Without the history and practice of staying active, older bodies lose abilities such as balance, flexibility, and strength which can also be an attribute to the decline in the older populations of this study. The drop in participation numbers by all age groups in later collection years might also reflect social economic changes in society, such as the recession and financial crisis of 2007–08. The Ewert (1983) article pointed out one of the requirements that allows people to pursue leisure activities along with time and ability is income, or disposable funds. With what some consider to be the worst financial situation since the Great Depression, it is reasonable to argue that lack of disposable funds may have played a role in the general decline in participation within these age groups and time period. Further study will be needed to determine if the drop in participation is related. Active older adults (45–60-year-old combined age groups) prefer Beginning and Advanced courses. This indicates that active older adults are interested in starting new activities or honing already acquired skills. This reflects the theory of serious leisure, which refers to active older adults actively searching out experiences, or the desire to show their abilities and live up to potential (Stebbins, 1979, 1980, 1982, p. 2015). Older age ranges (61–65 & 66–70) lack representation which is a limitation of this study. It is still important to note that generally, the upper age ranges don’t follow the same patterns as 45–60 years old combined age groups. A suggested area for future study would be to look at expectations through a generational lens, baby-boomers v. the silent generation. Participation in canoeing and climbing are the least popular activities while sea kayaking and whitewater are more popular. The Outdoor Foundation (2017) indicates this is congruent with national trends. This study found similar results in that climbing and canoeing are the least popular courses. A suggested future study is to explore why these trends exist. A trend analysis over the collection years of this study showed a steady relationship between the high, intermediate and low variables. With the exception of participating to show control which declined across all years with the major decline in 2007 when the expectational variables of doing something out of the normal routine, doing something novel, and exhilaration showed an increase. Danger showed an increasing trend starting in the year 2006. This makes sense in that often times when people are doing a new activity that they feel less in control and their perception of danger is increased. Generally, we can expect expectations to remain stable for active older adults. Developing a skill and being in the natural environment scored relatively high. These expectations are different from the findings of the entire sample as presented in the Gilbertson and Ewert (2015) study. Their sample was primarily college-aged and identified that being in the natural environment was not a strong expectation. RQ3: Is there a difference between genders of older adult participants in adventure education programs? By population, the sample had more self-identifying males (51) than self-identifying females (20). Female participation of 39% is slightly lower than the Outdoor Foundation (2010), which reports a 44% female participation at the time of this study’s data collection. Canoeing and climbing had similar participant numbers between genders, however, whitewater was predominantly male, and sea kayaking was the activity most chosen by females. This supports the original study’s gender results in that males were more motivated by sensation seeking activities, and females were motivated more by social activities (Gilbertson & Ewert, 2015). Proportionally, active older adult males and females have very similar scores (Figure 4). This means males and females are seeking the same or similar things in an activity. Both active older adult males and females reported being motivated by the natural environment and the novelty of the activity. Males and females report that the expectations of being able to show others how to do an activity and being known as a climber/kayaker/canoeist are the least identified expectational variables. Meaning, they are not specifically there to be referred to, or identified, as ‘a climber, a sea kayaker, etc.’ Active older adult males report the expectation of gaining or practicing and honing a skill is important. For females, being in a natural environment, the value of the activity and the novelty of the activity are given preference. This is reflected in the trends as well (beginner and advanced course populations). The individual expectational variables that females chose indicate they are motivated by escape from the norm and the value that they found in either the activity or the natural environment. Implications This information affects the outdoor industry. Administrators who are prepared for the largest demographic shift in the United States history (Colby & Ortman, 2014; McLean et al., 2005) will be able to recognize that an active older population could be a source of additional income. To prepare, a closer look at the format of existing programming is suggested and a willingness to modify, or offer new programming may be needed. Focus on beginner and advanced skill levels of each activity. Gear may need to be fully outfitted so as to provide positive experiences for beginners. Previous studies have shown that male and female expectations differ, so it is not unreasonable to believe that age also plays a role in participant expectations. Programming that is specifically offered by age group will create space for participants who are looking to socially interact with others who share a similar background. The ‘day camp’ model of programming with age restrictions would fit this need. Likewise, a critical look at who is leading these activities is needed. Figure 4. Proportional trends by gender. 168 G. J. PETRY AND K. GILBERTSON It seems common practice for the adventure education and outdoor industry providers to have instructors who are in their twenties. A disconnect may be present between the perceived expectations by the instructors versus the actual expectations for the older audience. Thus, it would behoove programs to have instructors who are of a similar age group or instructors who better understand the expectations of their older participants. Understanding the importance of this may require hiring or assigning older group leaders to specific programs or additional trainings. Consideration should be given to gender specific programming for this population as well. Males prefer to work on their skill development, while those identifying as females find value in the natural environment, and novelty. Marketing firms need not focus on selling an image of ‘Cool’ or ‘Extreme’, but focus on the experience programs offer, the skills that can be learned or advanced, and the social structures of the program, i.e. group dinners, and social hours, and choices of participation in a variety of activities. A focus on building newfound skills and escape (from norms) themed programming would be beneficial. Furthermore, marketing regarding the types of instructors on courses that mirror closer to their clientele may also be beneficial. Conclusion Experience expectations of active older adults differ from that of younger populations. Active older adults are searching for programming that offers clear, achievable goals where they can have some influence over outcomes and that occurs in a natural setting. This means that they could be involved in program planning such as logistics, route decisions, or menu planning. Adult learning theory supports this approach which can provide opportunities for participants to actively plan for their participation in parts of their larger experience, thus allowing them to take more control over the outcomes of the experience. This approach may seem novel because, too often, younger instructors are used to teaching audiences that are younger and have different experience expectations. Active older adults find that being part of a group, the excitement of doing something new, and a chance to build on-or-acquire new skills within adventure education programming are important to deciding whether or not to participate. Merriam and Kee (2014) state that lifelong learning for older adults directly affects community wellbeing. Adventure education programmers and the instructor should be mindful of this desire to be social with other participants. Facilitation skills in group development through techniques such as front loading and debriefing experiences will also become essential to creating an environment that fosters a sense of belonging. Mixing skill levels and providing opportunities for participants to help each other is another way to engage a spectrum of skill levels (starting new or honing skills sets) and to aid in group development. Adventure education programs can help to build strong communities and provide opportunities to help successful aging of active older adults. To accomplish this, we recommend that they strive to:  have a stronger marketing focus on beginner and advanced skill levels;  training for younger instructors to match participant expectations or employ older instructors whose instructional expectations match the experience expectations of the older audiences; consider gender-specific programming that has blended components of skill’s reinforcement for males (versus a focus on risk); and having stronger focus on the natural environment and social interaction for both male and female participants. In conclusion, populations of active older adults have different expectations and programming needs than younger populations. Grouping these two populations together can hinder future JOURNAL OF ADVENTURE EDUCATION AND OUTDOOR LEARNING 169 active older adult participation by confusing differing experience expectations. Significant opportunities exist for this growing demographic in a variety of sectors of society including access to outdoor programming services that can be found in higher education institutions. Separate programming, adjustments to program facilitation, providing staff who are either older or who are trained to meet these expectations including meeting gender needs more deliberately are recommended. Through these findings, it seems that now is the time to strive to meet the needs of active older adults for outdoor adventure structured programs.