Adventure education as aesthetic experience ABSTRACT This study is an investigation of what happens to participants during their adventure education (AE) experiences and the meanings they ascribe to those experiences. These topics were explored through the qualitative framework of educational connoisseurship and criticism at three sites: a backpacking expedition, a challenge course and a multi-activity adventure programme. Through 183 hours of observation and 74 interviews with 41 participants, the qualities of AE as aesthetic experience were revealed. This conception of AE experience is characterised through sensory encounters, full attention and aesthetic paradox. Findings are supported with the voices of participants, and the significance of this conception of AE experience is discussed. Adventure education (AE) can be considered the use of adventure experiences for educational purposes (Mortlock, Citation1978). Understanding the participant experience in AE, then, is a central concern for those advancing theory and practice in this field. Scholars have attended to these experiences through both theoretical and empirical approaches. Theoretical studies of AE have presented conceptions of the experience, which serve to enrich perceptions of AE and guide practice (see Mortlock, Citation1978; Priest & Martin, Citation1985). Empirical studies in AE continue to corroborate and complicate these theories of experience (see Brewer & Sparkes, Citation2011; Kalisch, Bobilya, & Daniel, Citation2011; Magnussen, Citation2012). Bridging the gap between these theoretical and practical perspectives is complicated somewhat by programmatic eclecticism, which results in experiential diversity across the field of AE. Unsurprisingly, there remains a degree of perplexity concerning the ‘process variables’ (Davidson, Citation2001, p. 12), ‘inner workings’ (Shooter, Citation2010, p. 290) and ascribed meanings of AE experiences. Accordingly, many contend that an experience-centric line of inquiry is critical to advancing AE discourse (Durr, Citation2009; Martin & Leberman, Citation2005; Nichols, Citation2000). This study is an effort to contribute to this line of inquiry.
Through the method of educational connoisseurship and criticism, I studied what happens to participants during their AE experiences and what meanings they ascribe to those experiences at three AE sites. This study revealed a fresh perspective of AE as aesthetic experience. Footnote1 The purpose of this work is to introduce and characterize this empirically grounded conception in the hopes of advancing discourse concerning the form and function of AE experiences as they manifest in practice. A review of several notions of experience and their relevance for AE frames this inquiry. Aesthetic experience in outdoor and adventure education
The literature concerning outdoor and AE experiences and its relation to aesthetic experience is extensive. Hints of aesthetic quality in AE can be traced back at least as far as Kurt Hahn’s early school in Gordonstoun (circa 1934), in which ‘action and thought would not be divided into two hostile camps’ (as cited in Hopkins & Putnam, Citation1993, p. 23). Some note how the perception of danger in adventure contexts can heighten our sensory awareness (Gonzales, Citation2003; Mortlock, Citation1984), and others celebrate the integration of mind and body, as well as the kinaesthetic awareness that can occur in these experiences (Kiewa, Citation1999). In the review that follows, I trace a lineage of aesthetic experience in AE discourse, including the prominent conceptions of AE experience and recent theoretical and empirical works that support the notion of AE as aesthetic experience.
Stages of adventure
In his seminal presentation, Mortlock (Citation1978, Citation1984) outlined four stages of adventure: recreation/play, adventure, frontier adventure, and misadventure. Mortlock (Citation1978) positioned stages two and three (adventure and frontier adventure) as the aim, where successfully overcoming challenges and ‘positive and satisfying human feelings’ (p. 11) were possible. He notes that every person has a unique ‘adventure threshold’ (p. 11) and therefore any given adventure can result in different stages for different participants. This approach honors the personal dimension of these often communal undertakings, which can produce benefits for both. Pertaining to aesthetic experience, Mortlock (Citation1984) describes peak adventure as follows:
To be totally at peace within a storm, on the edge of one’s life, where all your experience and abilities are being taxed to their utmost, must be one of the ultimate experiences. At such times, [we] may feel that [we are] both ‘atom and God’, that [we are] an indivisible part of the harmony of Nature; and that before and after the experience are totally irrelevant. (p. 40) Mortlock’s (Citation1984) ‘adventure alternative’ also explains the adventure experience as one of vitality: ‘It is far beyond purely physical exuberance. The whole being is involved in taking on the challenge of life, in all its senses, with vitality closely linked to both determination and self-confidence’ (p. 74).
Adventure as flow Through his study of dancers, rock climbers, chess players, musicians, surgeons and basketball players, Csikszentmihalyi (Citation1974) put forward an experience-type called flow. Flow is ‘the state in which action follows upon action according to an internal logic which seems to need no conscious intervention on our part’ (p. 59). Flow, or ‘peak experience,’ is reached when the abilities of the individual match the demands of the task.
Mitchell (Citation1983) further explored and applied Csikszentmihalyi’s (Citation1974) ideas to the experience of mountaineers. To Mitchell, the criteria of flow are exhibited by the ‘mountain experience,’ where ‘the climber’s concentration is heightened [and] focused on a narrower range of concerns—in space on problems literally at hand, and in time on the present’ (p. 166). Further evidence of flow lies in the self-fulfilling nature of adventure for Mitchell: ‘The reward of climbing is climbing itself. Reaching the summit is not the culmination of the climb but a waypoint marking the end of upward travel’ (p. 155). These attributes of the mountain experience showcase the conceptual overlap of flow and aesthetic experience in adventure.
Adventure experience paradigm
Priest and Martin’s (Citation1985) adventure experience paradigm maps Mortlock’s (Citation1978, Citation1984) stages of adventure and ideas of objective and subjective danger atop Mitchell’s (Citation1983) presentation of flow in adventure. The result is a model that categorises experience based on varying degrees of risk and competence. Priest and Martin argue that to under, over or accurately perceive risk and competence stems from nine characteristic behaviour-types. This results in five potential experiences: exploration and experimentation; adventure; misadventure; devastation and disaster; and, when risk and competence are matched, peak adventure. They present peak adventure, similar to frontier adventure, as embodying a ‘state of flow’ (p. 2). With this relationship between perceived risk and competence, the ideal disposition was that of the astute adventurer and the experience of aim was peak adventure. The distinction of this model from previous conceptions, as it pertains to aesthetic experience, is the overt focus on risk and the perception of risk. As Uhrmacher (Citation2009) notes, ‘aesthetic experience is a venture into the unknown, which as Dewey points out, entails risk’ (p. 624).
Outdoor education as aesthetic/reflective
In the field of outdoor education, Quay (Citation2013) argues that the oft-cited trilogy of outdoor education—self, other, nature—may be considered through aesthetic and reflective lenses of experience. On the one hand, the experience can be considered aesthetic, in which there is no clear line of demarcation between self, other and nature. To the other, the three may be considered as separate but connected entities through reflective experience. Quay, in considering Heidegger, notes that ‘the ontological difference’ (p. 147) provides a passageway for uniting these two perspectives (reflective and aesthetic), which is accessed through inquiry. Particularly relevant to this discussion, he highlights the importance of considering aesthetic experiences in outdoor education:
To really understand the living experiences of the participants in our programmes we have to envision them, feel them, as aesthetic experiences. Then we may perhaps be better placed to consider the problems that could emerge and the ways in which reflective experience contributes to the ongoing process of resolution—as changing aesthetic experience—which is at the same time a reorganisation of the relations between self, others and nature. (Quay, Citation2013, p. 154)
Quay also acknowledges the difficulties of attending to aesthetic dimensions of experience: ‘grasping direct aesthetic experience, immediate experience, living experience, is not necessarily easy; not because it is complex or complicated but because it is so simple, so simple in fact that we tend to overlook it’ (p. 150).
Further empirical support
Recent works provide empirical support to the discourse above and further suggest the relevance of aesthetic experience for AE. In the field of environmental education, for instance, Iared, de Oliveira, and Reid (Citation2017) utilise a lens of aesthetic experience and a participatory narrative approach to articulate several themes with implications for environmental education: ‘recognising the singularity of experience; attending to the qualities of experience; acknowledging the value/s of “lighter” and “darker” experiences; and deepening emotions and verbal communication’ (p. 1). Also, in their study of sixth graders at an outdoor environmental school, Manni, Ottander, and Sporre (Citation2017) found that ‘aesthetic experiences were present in all phases of the meaning-making processes and provided continuity between the different stages of the students’ shared processes’ (p. 118). Accordingly, Manni et al. contend that ‘educational approaches ought to explicitly take [aesthetic factors] into account and encourage them in daily practice’ (p. 118).
Still other studies in AE add empirical support to the conception of AE as aesthetic experience. The adventure experience has been described as one of feeling ‘so alive’ (Magnussen, Citation2012, p. 348), as possessing ‘a quality of being alive to the present that was about paying effortless attention to oneself or the surrounding environment’ (Morse, Citation2015, p. 176), and one in which ‘emotional engagement facilitates full attention or full presence’ (Ingman, Citation2017, p. 346). Indeed, the literature is brimming with insinuation concerning the congruence of AE and aesthetic experience.
The above studies have made great strides in scaffolding an understanding of the AE experience. But there is more to be done. Works by Shooter (Citation2010), Davidson (Citation2001), Martin and Leberman (Citation2005) and others echo the call for more inquiries of AE experiences per se. Theoretic conceptions of AE experience have scant empirical support, and programmatic eclecticism in the AE field exacerbates the difficulty of achieving a form of conceptual unity. This study stands to help address (but certainly not resolve) these concerns by presenting and characterising an additional conception of AE experience grounded in participant experiences of contemporary programmes.
Method
The method used in this study is educational connoisseurship and criticism (or educational criticism), a methodology in which the antecedent knowledge and perceptual capacities of the researcher are celebrated rather than bracketed. Connoisseurship pertains to the appreciation and discernment of a topic and criticism to disclosing insights generated (Eisner, Citation1998). In other words, in sharing what I have come to learn, others interested in this subject may return to the field with new insights about AE. The educational critic’s search is ultimately one of value, with the ultimate aim being the ‘reëducation of perception’ (Dewey, Citation2005, p. 338).
Educational criticism attends to dimensions of description, interpretation, evaluation and thematics. Description in educational criticism ‘is an effort to characterize or render the pervasive and purely descriptive aspects of the phenomena one attends to’ (Eisner, Citation1976/2005a, p. 41); to describe what it is I, as critic, have seen, heard, smelled, tasted and felt in the context of AE. The interpretive dimension of educational criticism is aimed at making sense of what is gleaned from inquiry in the search for value. It ‘represents an effort to understand the meaning and significance that various forms of action have for those in a social setting’ (Eisner, Citation2005a/Citation2005a; p. 44). Through the evaluative dimension, the critic offers value statements about events perceived, described, interpreted and portrayed. And finally, the thematic dimension of educational criticism relates to ‘identifying the recurring messages that pervade the situation’ (Eisner, Citation1998, p. 104). Eisner addressed the trustworthiness of this method through three sources for credibility: structural corroboration, the use of various forms of data in the presentation of ‘a confluence of evidence’ (p. 110); consensual validation, or ‘agreement among competent others’ (p. 112); and referential adequacy, the extent to which others can perceive and validate the findings in the context studied.
This methodology was applied in this study because (1) its attention to discerning the nuances of qualities within a topic (Uhrmacher, McConnell Moroye, & Flinders, Citation2017) is promising for addressing the dearth in the literature, (2) its use contributes to the diversification of methods utilised to explore AE experiences, and (3) it aligns with the two research questions guiding this inquiry:
1.	What happens to participants during the adventure education experience?
2.	What meanings do participants of adventure education ascribe to those experiences?
Sites and participants
I explored these questions at three sites of the AE experience: a challenge course (Redcloud Challenge Course), a backpacking expedition (Shavano Expeditions) and a multi-activity adventure programme (Wilson Academy). All sites advertise achieving educational aims through adventurous experiences, but approached these aims through different programmatic methods. These sites were chosen for their programmatic diversity under the shared domain of AE in the hopes of understanding the qualities of AE experiences broadly defined.
Forty-one AE participants were included in this study—14 females and 27 males. Participants ranged in age from 9 to 19 years and represented various ethnic, cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds (Shavano required Free/Reduced Lunch enrolment to qualify, and Wilson Academy and Redcloud both utilised sliding pay scales). I also note that I, as researcher, am a white male with experience in adventure (primarily as a climber) and 8 years of experience as an adventure educator across five different AE programmes (including challenge courses, climbing programmes, and outdoor adventure programmes and expeditions) for participants ages 5 and above. Though I have found value in the adventure experience, I question the meanings and significance of these experiences for others, particularly as they pertain to educational aims. All participant and site names included are pseudonyms. Data collection
I utilised various observational (audio excerpts, photographs, videos, and field notes) and interview (semi-structured and mobile or conversational) techniques while in the field (Rossman & Rallis, Citation2017; Seidman, Citation2006). Given the focus on ascribed meanings in this study, semi-structured interviews were based on Seidman’s phenomenological structure of questioning (background, description and meaning). In total, across 5 months, I observed AE participants in the field for 183 h and conducted 74 interviews. I transcribed all interviews and expanded field notes as they were collected (Dewalt & Dewalt, Citation2011). I then analysed all data inductively through open and axial coding, aided with artistic inference (Eisner, Citation1985/Citation2005a), conceptual mapping (Davies, Citation2011) and visual representations of data (Leavy, Citation2009) to identify the qualities of experience. Preliminary findings were reviewed by a peer debriefer to encourage consensual validation (Eisner, Citation1998). These qualities were then compared with Dewey’s (Citation2005) notion of aesthetic experience (see Glaser, Citation1965; Rossman & Rallis, Citation2017).
A note on meanings
The effort to identify the meanings participants ascribe to AE experiences is a cause now taken up seriously by the field (see Brewer & Sparkes, Citation2011; Davidson, Citation2001; Ingman, Citation2017; Loeffler, Citation2004). But several factors influence the meanings ascribed to an experience. Meaning is culturally mediated (Uhrmacher, Citation2002), reflects the life-context (Csikszentmihalyi, Citation1990) and station of experience for the individual constructing that meaning (Manni et al., Citation2017; Quay, Citation2013), and is ‘to some degree, a function of the participant’s action with the interviewer’ (Seidman, Citation2006, p. 23). Further, meanings can occupy different realms or domains (e.g. cognitive/synnoetic, ontological/synoptic) and the sensibilities or tendencies of the meaning-maker influence the domain of meaning constructed (Phenix, Citation1964; Uhrmacher, Citation2002). Therefore, to say that a given meaning ascribed to an experience by an individual is the meaning of the experience, disregards the relationship of meaning with the context in which the meaning was created. I present these qualifications not to excuse meanings as an inadequate window into experience, but to honour the indeterminacy of understanding experience through meanings.
Accordingly, this study is not a search for the meaning of AE experiences in a phenomenological sense (see Heidegger, 1Citation9927/Citation2010; Van Manen, Citation1990); rather, this was an exploration of what meanings were ascribed to the experience alongside what happens to participants during their AE experience. The use of various methods of observation and interviewing under the methodology of educational criticism—which positions the role of the researcher to ‘function as a midwife to perception’ (Eisner, Citation1985, p. 217)—resulted in an empirically corroborative conception of AE as aesthetic experience.
Findings
I illustrate a conception of AE as aesthetic experience through three qualities: sensory encounters, full attention and aesthetic paradox. These findings are supported by field notes and the voices of participants from the three sites of study.
Sensory encounters
I introduce the term ‘sensory encounters’ to denote instances in which attention to the senses or sensation emerged as a prominent feature of an AE experience. These encounters manifest through both explicit, intentional facilitation and as implicit, organic characteristics of the AE experience. Explicit sensory encounters included the manipulation of sensory engagement or encouraging conscious perception at the three sites of study. For instance, at Shavano, participants were blindfolded and tasked to feel the ground to later identify their surroundings. Or, at both Shavano and Redcloud, participants engaged in initiatives where speaking was prohibited, causing them to communicate through unfamiliar means (non-auditory). This same type of conscious attention to select senses occurred at the Academy when Beth, the geology instructor, encouraged participants to stand in silence as they observed rocks on the hillside above them: ‘It can be anything, look at the color, look at the texture.’ This attempt to awaken perception was further demonstrated on a geology hunt when Beth picked up rocks on the trail during the hike and asked:
Beth:
‘What do you notice about this rock?’
Participants:
Touching, smelling, and looking at the rock, ‘It kind of feels like sandstone.’ ‘It doesn’t smell good.’ ‘It’s grey and loose.’
Beth:
Further up the trail, picking up a different rock, ‘Everyone feel this rock and tell me if it feels the same or different [as the last rock].’ As participants examine the rock, she further prompts them to consider the qualities of the rocks, ‘Does this one feel sharp? . . . Did the sandstone feel sharp? . . . Can you see individual grains in this one?’
Sensory encounters were also persistent as an organic component of AE experiences. At Shavano, participants wheezed in the thin air of a high mountain pass, dipped their feet into the frigid water of an alpine lake, traversed rocky hillsides and slid down a wet snowfield. At the Academy, participants bounced through the rapids of a river, felt their way up rock faces and watched the varying colours of flame as they tried to build a fire. At Redcloud participants balanced on boards, swung from ropes high above the ground, and shifted their weight as they balanced atop wooden platforms or cables.
Consciousness of this sensory involvement was evidenced through participant recollections of the experience. James and Becky of the Academy described their experience climbing indoors:
James:
‘I’m actually really small, so it’s hard to reach [the holds]. … Also sometimes I’m scared if I’m gonna, like, let go and hit the wall or something. … I usually go for the [holds] that indent. You know, like the ones that grab like that.’ James holds up his hand in the shape of a hook.
Becky:
‘[The holds are] really grippy, and they’re easy to grip. Some of them are actually really hard to grip because they don’t have a space for your fingers.’
James and Becky communicate an awareness of both the conditions of the environment and their interaction with those conditions. This awareness was also reflected through descriptions of experiences on high elements at Redcloud:
Kim:
‘Once you get up there it’s not that bad. The first step on the wire is weird because it’s not very tensioned and you’re like, “Whoah!” … It felt weird. ‘Cause, like, you’re standing on this little thing [forty] feet into the air, almost on your stomach. It feels like, like, “Whoah!” … It’s kind of, I dunno. … ‘Cause when you’re looking down, you’re like, “Oh… my god.”’
Christy:
‘I think the hardest part of it was stepping from the platform to the loop, ‘cause that was like, “Oh my goodness!” But after that, it was just arm strength.’
Sarah:
‘It wasn’t that scary. I think it’s all your adrenaline. And as I was up there I could feel the whole pole shaking and I was like, “Oh no!”’
While some participants responded to the experience with shock or regret—‘Whoah!’ ‘Oh my god,’ ‘Oh my goodness!’ ‘Oh no!’—others celebrated these sensations on account of the ineffable feelings associated:
Becky:
‘[Rafting down the river] sort of feels like you’re flying down the river. … And also many waterfalls are fun to go down. … I get butterflies in my stomach, and I kind of like that feeling.’
George:
‘It feels like you’re part of, just a part of nature when you’re out there. … Just that good feeling you get when you’re hiking up a steep, steep hill and you slow down and take a break, drink some of that cold water. Just the feeling I think.’
…
George:
‘[This experience is] Worth it. So worth it. [Because of] the beauty, and the good feeling that you have when you sit down in that cool mountain air when you’re covered in sweat from your hike. Cooling down and just feeling the breeze. Feeling the ground under you while you’re sitting. Tasting the air. When you dip your feet into the lake at the top of the mountain.’
Kyle:
‘[When I’m climbing] I feel like I’m free or something like that, and that I’m just going really, really fast. … It’s the same with skiing pretty much, you just feel free. You feel like you can do anything pretty much.’
Participants also explained how this sensory awareness informed their actions within the experience. As Kevin reflected on his decision-making process while climbing:
Kevin:
‘You need to think about where you’re going and climbing. What handholds you’re going to take and what footholds you’re going to take.’
BenFootnote2:
‘So how do you figure that out?’
Kevin:
‘So when you’re on the wall, you have to look down at both feet each time you take a step so you don’t slip on a loose hold that probably would slip. And with your handholds, you try to look up and put your hands in there for a second and see if it’s grippy or not grippy.’
This response shows that not only were participants conscious of sensory encounters in the AE experience, but also that perceptions of the environment inform actions in the immediate experience. This dimension of aesthetic experience in AE is further characterised through full attention.
Full attention
Full attention was apparent through both the behaviour of participants during AE activities and through interview excerpts that revealed high levels of attention in these experiences. A common tell of this attention in the experience was the silence of participants while engaged in demanding AE activities. Generally, as the demands of the experience grew in intensity—be they steeper trails, rougher rapids, or higher elevations—once talkative participants would grow silent. Observational field notes from the Academy, Shavano and Redcloud (respectively) showcase this recurrent phenomenon:
As the group paddles down-river past me, I notice that none of the kids are talking. Their collective silence is deafening—all that can be heard is the chaotic crashing of the water, and the muffled voices of instructors, who yell directions to the kids.
As the group hikes uphill, chatter and conversation comes to a screeching halt. Kids are seemingly preoccupied with breathing and walking.
The crowd of 14 or so participants is dead silent as he balances on top of the pole. On top of the pole, he is on a stage for all other participants. His feet begin to shake as he stands [up]. He breaks the silence: ‘I don’t know why I’m shaking!’
Other activities in which full attention was readily observable include low elements at Redcloud, rock climbing at the Academy, and fly fishing at the Academy, to name a few. Discussion
I have provided evidence from three sites of the AE experience that not only conveys congruence between Dewey’s aesthetic experience and AE, but also characterises the form of aesthetic experience in AE. Though I have presented aspects of the aesthetic separately, through qualities of sensory encounters, full attention and aesthetic paradox, they are united in the participants’ experiences. Each of these qualities of aesthetic experience interacts with AE discourse in different ways.
First, full attention, characterised above as comprehensive engagement with the immediate conditions of experience, is well accounted for through extant conceptions of AE experience. Flow (Csikszentmihalyi, Citation1974), mountain experience (Mitchell, Citation1983), frontier adventure (Mortlock, Citation1984) and peak adventure (Priest & Martin, Citation1985) all present the experience as a live engagement with the immediate conditions of experience in which the challenges of the present demand a comprehensive conscious effort from the individual. Full attention, as it is presented in this work through the framework of aesthetic experience, elevates and corroborates this notion of AE experience, and further illustrates the form of full attention in contemporary AE programmes.
Second, it is fair to consider implicit sensory encounters to be, unsurprisingly, implicit in other conceptions of AE experience; such organic engagement of the senses is reflected in Mortlock’s (Citation1984) notation of vitality, Csikszentmihalyi’s (Citation1974) and Mitchell’s (Citation1983) scope of focus in the flow and mountain experience, and the centrality of perception in Priest and Martin (Citation1985) experience paradigm. But the positive value often placed on these same sensory experiences by participants in AE may be worthy of future study. Further, explicit sensory encounters, or experiences in which individual senses are intentionally manipulated or attended to through experience, is absent from the above conceptions of AE experience. Yet its prevalence in the practice of AE stands as evidence that sensory manipulation and attention is, at minimum, an implicit tenet of contemporary AE programming. This raises questions as to the sources and purposes of explicit sensory encounters in AE and the potential benefits and limitations associated with such an experience.
Third and finally, aesthetic paradox, an experienced dissonance between cognitive reasoning and aesthetic sensation, is a unique perspective of AE experiences. Aesthetic paradox may be considered as a conceptual complement or alternative to ‘perceived risk’ (Priest, Citation1999, p. 113), and may advance discourse concerning the relationship of the senses, risk, perception and cognition within AE. This perspective of AE experience also presents an intriguing intersection with Quay’s (Citation2013) discussion because aesthetic paradox, to an extent, presents the experience as simultaneously (or cyclically) aesthetic and reflective (also see Morse, Citation2014).
The overarching contribution of this study is the use of qualitative methods with participants at various AE sites, which has yielded an empirically grounded conception of AE experience. Therefore, alongside conceptions of AE as an experience of flow, stages, or an experience paradigm, we may also consider aesthetic experience, as characterised through sensory encounters, full attention and aesthetic paradox. This is not to supplant or refute other conceptions of AE experience, nor should this conception be considered as encompassing the wide diversity of experiences and meanings that occur within AE. Rather, the intention is to illustrate this dimension of experience as it manifest in the field at the three sites of study. Ultimately, presenting such an argument serves to reëducate perceptions concerning the use of adventurous experiences for educational purposes. For instance, the popular acceptance of the AE experience as a flow-like experience has resulted in practical recommendations of matching participant abilities with challenges or levels of risk. Similarly, with aesthetic experience in mind, practitioners could be mindful to offer the conditions of different types of aesthetic experiences towards varied ends. It is likely that the different qualities of aesthetic experience in AE present unique educational opportunities for AE participants, which can be operationalized through conscious facilitation and consideration of each. For example, experiences of full attention may possess lessons pertaining to focus or presence; aesthetic paradox may provide a structure for reconciling internal dissonance; and sensory encounters may awaken perceptual capacities.
A further discursive step regarding the conception of AE as aesthetic experience concerns the educational aims purported in AE.Footnote4 It is common to consider the educational value of AE to be measured in the resulting outcomes afforded participants. This utilitarian rationale of the AE experience embraces a particular paradigm of education; namely, education as preparation. But looking to Dewey’s (Citation2005) contentions concerning the educational ends of aesthetic experience suggests educational virtue on an alternative plane:
Wherever conditions are such as to prevent the act of production from being an experience in which the whole creature is alive and in which he possesses his living through enjoyment, the product will lack something of being [a]esthetic. No matter how useful it is for special and limited ends, it will not be useful in the ultimate degree—that of contributing directly and liberally to an expanding and enriched life. (p. 27)
It would stand to reason that if this conception of experience is one with AE, then AE also serves this ‘ultimate’ utility. To me it seems reasonable to embrace this aspect of experience as among the central purposes of AE. Further, if an experience satisfies this requirement—that it contributes ‘directly and liberally to an expanding and enriched life’—to attest that the value of the experience is in service to other ‘special and limited ends’ may sell the experience short. A crude utilitarian approach to experience in AE misses the mark because the achievement of aesthetic experience is an end in itself and this end is one with education.Footnote5
More work needs to be done to articulate the forms and functions of aesthetic experiences in AE. Our field may benefit from examining the virtues of aesthetic experience in other disciplines to better characterise the educational import of these experiences in AE (see Eisner, Citation1985/Citation2005b; Moroye & Uhrmacher, Citation2009; Uhrmacher, Citation2009; Uhrmacher, Conrad, & Lindquist, Citation2010). Other prospective avenues of inquiry include the character of aesthetic experiences in different settings of AE, the relationship of risk to aesthetic experience, the role of experiential complements to aesthetic experience (e.g. reflective experience) (Quay, Citation2013) and other programmatic tactics to emphasise the educational value of aesthetic experiences in AE. More broadly, offering adventure education as aesthetic experience, as characterised by sensory encounters, full attention and aesthetic paradox, reinstates the promise of using inductive empirical methods of inquiry to continue our exploration of AE experiences. Without such inquiries, aspects of these experiences will remain enigmatic.





