Using Outdoor Adventure Education to Develop Students’ Groupwork Skills: A Quantitative Exploration of Reaction and Learning Abstract This study investigates the initial development of groupwork skills through outdoor adventure education (OAE) and the factors that predict the extent of this development, using the first two levels of Kirkpatrick’s model of training evaluation. University students (N = 238) completed questionnaires measuring their initial reactions to OAE (Level 1 of the Kirkpatrick model) and learning from pre- to post-course (Level 2). There were high levels of enjoyment and satisfaction with OAE, and significant self-reported improvements in the use of groupwork skills, attitudes toward groupwork, and groupwork self-efficacy. Learning and intention to transfer learning to the university setting were both positively predicted by students’ perceived use of groupwork skills before OAE, course satisfaction, enjoyment, groupwork self-efficacy, and attitude toward groupwork. These findings demonstrate that OAE increases students’ use of interpersonal groupwork skills, and that this is predicted by positive beliefs at baseline and favorable reactions to the learning experience. Keywords groupwork skills, the Kirkpatrick model, adventure programming, teamwork, life skills, higher education Engaging university students in experiential, group-based activities is known to pro mote more meaningful learning, retention, academic achievement, social support, self esteem, retention, and a range of employability skills (Cumming, Woodcock, Cooley, Holland, & Burns, 2014; Dewey, 1938). To facilitate the benefits of groupwork, some universities supplement academic groupwork with outdoor adventure education (OAE) courses (Cooley, Burns, & Cumming, 2015). Within the present study, OAE is used to describe short (i.e., 1-5 day) residential courses that involve structured outdoor activities such as raft building and ropes courses. These activities are based upon the experiential learning cycle (Kolb, 1984) and are designed to encourage social interaction, test, develop, and prompt reflection on groupwork skills, and benefit students on their return to university. In the present study, it was compulsory for students to attend OAE midway through their degree programs, in preparation for academic groupwork upon their return to university. This specific form of OAE, often termed “outdoor-centered training,” is different from other types of outdoor adventure activities such as wilderness expeditions (e.g., sailing and backpacking), which tend to be longer and have less structured outcomes (Mazany, Francis, & Sumich, 1997). In comparison, the shorter, outdoor-centered form of OAE is also more easily embedded into degree courses with large student numbers. However, a recent review suggests that the impact of this specific form of OAE on university students needs more systematic investigation (Cooley, Burns et al., 2015). Kirkpatrick’s (1994) model of training evaluation (hereafter referred to as the “Kirkpatrick model”) offers a systematic and effective framework to evaluating OAE (Cooley, Burns et al., 2015; McEvoy, 1997). Based on the Kirkpatrick model, a thorough evaluation should span four levels: Level 1 (Reaction) measures attendees’ initial feelings after completing a training experience, including enjoyment and satisfaction. Level 2 (Learning) assesses changes in knowledge, skills, and/or attitudes from pre-to post-training, such as groupwork self-efficacy (GWSE) and the intention to transfer learning to another setting. Level 3 (Behavior) explores behavior change when attendees return to their typical working environments (e.g., improved group behavior back at university). Finally, Level 4 (Results) refers to the overall impact these changes have on target outcomes, such as improved academic performance. Due to the complexity of the model and our rich dataset collected across all four levels, the present report focuses on Levels 1 and 2 of the Kirkpatrick model, and Levels 3 and 4 are reported separately. Although few studies have explicitly used the Kirkpatrick model to evaluate OAE, previous findings do map onto certain levels of the model. A recent review identified 11 studies that used a combination of methods to evaluate OAE when used at university to develop groupwork (Cooley, Burns et al., 2015). Among the qualitative studies, Prince and Dunne (1998) analyzed student reactions and learning using open-ended questions administered at the end of a single-day OAE course for law students. Students enjoyed OAE (Level 1) and reported developing numerous groupwork skills such as problem solving and reflection, as well as increased confidence (Level 2). More recently, a video diary room was used to capture engineering students’ reactions and learning while immersed in OAE ). Themes within the data also revealed high course satisfaction (Level 1) and the development of groupwork skills, such as communication, role allocation, and leadership, as well as more positive perceptions of the value of groupwork (Level 2). Quantitative studies have also explored students’ reaction and learning during OAE. For example, a group of business students completed a bespoke questionnaire before and after a 4-day OAE course (Mazany et al., 1997). Although significant increases were measured in groupwork skills such as decision making, inclusion of team members, communication, cohesion, time management, planning, and problem solving (Level 2), the authors suggested that further research was needed using more dependable measures of groupwork. In another study, a large percentage (83%) of medical students believed that their 4-day OAE course had contributed to their development of groupwork skills (Level 2; Juriza et al., 2011). Although previous research suggests that this form of OAE may be effective in developing groupwork at university, evidence has been limited by the use of bespoke questionnaires without adequate validity evidence (see Gunnell et al., 2014) and a lack of baseline measures and appropriate statistical analysis (Cooley, Burns et al., 2015; Hattie et al., 1997). In addition, a study has yet to evaluate the short, outdoor-centered form of OAE common within university, using a conceptually grounded measure of groupwork skills that includes both “task” groupwork skills (i.e., goal-directed behaviors, such as planning, goal setting, establishing roles, and monitoring group progress) and “interpersonal” groupwork skills (i.e., social behaviors, such as conflict resolution, attentiveness, social support, and positive reinforcement; Cumming et al., 2014; Stevens & Campion, 1994). More research is required to explore the factors that underpin and predict the outcomes measured, particularly when a control group is not available (Ewert, 1989; Sibthorp & Arthur-Banning, 2004). Hayes (2013) argued that studies should not only measure whether outcomes “do” occur but should also help explain “how” they occur, such as by exploring variables that may predict and/or mediate outcomes. Such understanding could lead to practical recommendations for course improvement. For example, positive engagement with OAE has previously been associated with students’ attitudes toward groupwork before OAE (Shivers-Blackwell, 2004), favorable perceptions of the OAE instructor (Mirkin & Middleton, 2014), and self-efficacy toward the outdoor activities (Propst & Koesler, 1998). This research suggests that attitudes, self efficacy, and instructor perceptions are likely to be important areas of measurement when assessing skill development during OAE. The Kirkpatrick model can, and has, been used to guide a more structured evaluation of these underlying processes. Cooley, Cumming, Holland, and Burns (2015) looked specifically at the factors behind the development of groupwork skills at each of the four levels. Following a longitudinal, qualitative investigation into OAE, the model for optimal learning and transfer (MOLT) was devised. The MOLT suggests that learning and transfer is facilitated by a set of contextual and learner characteristics, such as attitudes prior to OAE, perceived instructor support, course enjoyment, openness to experience, engagement, and intention to transfer (Cooley, Cumming et al., 2015). The importance of transfer intention as a prerequisite to learning transfer is also frequently theorized and evidenced within the organizational and training literature (e.g., Baldwin & Ford, 1988; Blume, Ford, Baldwin, & Huang, 2010; Foxon, 1994). In the present study, developing an intention to transfer learning is therefore considered a crucial Level 2 outcome of OAE. The MOLT is used in the present study to guide investigations into the factors that predict outcomes of OAE. Altogether, previous research suggests that attitudes, self-efficacy, and reaction to the learning environment (e.g., enjoyment and instructor satisfaction) may influence the development of groupwork skills during OAE. These assertions are also supported by Bandura’s (1977) social cognitive theory and the theory of planned behavior (Ajzen, 1991), which emphasize the need for positive attitudes and self-efficacy in the development of behavioral intentions and subsequent behavior change. The aims of the present study were twofold: (a) to measure the outcomes of OAE at Kirkpatrick Level 1 (i.e., reaction to OAE, the instructors, and enjoyment) and Level 2 (i.e., changes in task and interpersonal groupwork skills, attitudes, and self efficacy, and intention to transfer learning) and (b) to examine the factors related to these outcomes (i.e., which of the variables measured predict outcomes at Levels 1 and 2 of the Kirkpatrick model). In addressing these aims, the present study seeks to both provide an evaluation of a specific form of OAE that has previously lacked rigorous empirical testing and contribute to the broader theoretical understanding of some of the factors that predict and mediate reaction and learning outcomes. Hierarchical multiple regression (HMR) is used in the present study to examine the relationships that underpin the reaction and learning outcomes. Based on previous research, the theory of planned behavior (Ajzen, 1991), Bandura’s (1977) social cognitive theory, and the MOLT (Cooley, Cumming et al., 2015), it was first hypothesized that students’ perceptions of their existing groupwork skills, attitudes, and self-efficacy, measured before OAE, would positively predict their reaction to OAE and sub sequent learning. Second, it was hypothesized that measures of course reactions, groupwork attitudes, and self-efficacy, taken at the end of OAE, will positively predict the perceived use of task and interpersonal groupwork skills during OAE and students’ intentions to transfer these skills on their return to university. Method Participants During the course of the study, 303 students from a British University took part in one of several iterations of OAE with their respective degree cohorts. Seventy-nine per cent (n = 238) consented to participate in the study and completed a pre-course questionnaire, and ninety-six percent of these (n = 228) completed a post-course questionnaire. successfully reached the appropriate levels in English-language entrance tests. Participants had not received prior groupwork training during their degree courses before attending OAE. The OAE Course Students took part in a 2-day OAE course designed to challenge and develop group work skills. Activities were facilitated by trained instructors and progressed from 30-min icebreakers such as blindfolded orienteering exercises, to more complex activities such as raft building and ropes courses. All tasks required groups of five to eight students to work together to complete objectives and engage in reflective discussions. Groups also worked together to complete daily housekeeping duties (see Table 1 for an example itinerary or refer to Cooley (2015) for a more detailed description of the course). Measures Demographic information. The participants provided their age, gender, degree course, nationality, first language (English vs. other), and status (home/European Union vs. international student).1 Kirkpatrick model Level 1 (reaction). The main reaction variable was an overall course evaluation, using a two-item index (e.g., “I would recommend this course to a friend”; Filak & Sheldon, 2008). Both items were highly correlated with one another (r = .80, p < .001), thus supporting the use of an average across both items. In addition, measures of enjoyment and instructor evaluation were taken as these have been found to influence course evaluation (e.g., Cooley, Cumming et al., 2015). The instructor evaluation was obtained using another two-item index (e.g., “Overall, this instructor was excellent”; Filak & Sheldon, 2008), which were also highly correlated (r = .73, p < .001). Enjoyment was measured using seven items from the Interest/Enjoyment sub scale of the intrinsic motivation inventory (e.g., “I enjoyed doing the activities very much”; Ryan, 1982). All items were rated between 1 (not at all true) and 7 (very true), and averaged for each variable. Kirkpatrick model Level 2 (learning) Groupwork skills. Students’ self-reported use of effective groupwork skills was obtained using the 10-item Groupwork Skills Questionnaire (GSQ; Cumming et al., 2014). The GSQ is a multidimensional measure of task (e.g., “clearly define the roles of each group member”) and interpersonal (e.g., “provide emotional support to my group members”) groupwork skills. At baseline, following the stem “When working in groups I tend to . . .” students rated the items between 1 (never) and 5 (always). An average was calculated for each subscale. Students completed the GSQ again at the end of OAE using the stem “When working in groups during OAE, I . . .” This change in stem enabled a comparison between the use of groupwork skills during OAE and those typically used. Moderate interactor correlations were found between the task and interpersonal subscales (pre = .52, post = .53) indicating two distinct but related variables. Adequate validity evidence has previously been provided in support of the GSQ (Cumming et al., 2014). Groupwork self-efficacy. Groupwork self-efficacy (GWSE) was measured using a revised version of the Personal Efficacy Beliefs Scale (PEBS; Riggs, Warka, Babasa, Betancourt, & Hooker, 1994). Similar to McClough and Rogelberg (2003), items refer ring to “general work” were replaced with wording referring to “work in groups.” The 10 items assess students’ confidence and motivation to demonstrate skills that facilitate groupwork (e.g., “Most other students can work better in groups than I can”), rated on a 5-point scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). After reverse coding six items, the scores are averaged to form a measure of GWSE. Riggs and colleagues (1994) have reported evidence in support of the validity and reliability of this scale. Attitude toward groupwork. The Attitude Toward Working in a Group (ATWG) scale measures how students feel about working with others (Chapman & Van Auken, 2001). It consists of eight bipolar items (i.e., bad/good experience, waste of time/good use of time) that are rated on a 7-point semantic differential scale (1 = unfavorable; 7 = favorable) and averaged. Previous validity evidence for this scale is provided by Chapman, Meuter, Toy, and Wright (2006). Transfer intention. A six-item scale was created based on the theory of planned behavior (Ajzen, 1991). The items were designed to measure beliefs about the group work skills developed during OAE. Each item (e.g., “I intend to use the groupwork skills I developed during OAE when I next work in groups as part of my academic course”) was rated on a 7-point scale (1 = extremely unlikely, 7 = extremely likely). As recommended within the theory of planned behavior literature, the six items were worded in a similar way with different synonyms in replace of the word “intend” (e.g., “plan” and “will try”; Francis et al., 2004). Although these words are believed to have slightly different conceptual nuances to their meaning, they result in similar empirical responses and improve the validity of the measure when used as multiple items to measure intention (Armitage & Conner, 2001). After reverse coding two items, the six items were averaged to form a measure of transfer intention. Procedure The university ethics committee granted permission prior to recruitment, and informed consent was obtained from participants before questionnaires were completed. Participants were recruited face to face before they left to attend OAE. Questionnaires were completed just before and at the end of the course before students returned home. The GSQ, GWSE, and ATWG were completed at both time points to assess the Kirkpatrick model Level 2 (Learning). Due to the high percentage of international students, support was provided when completing questionnaires; however, no reoccur ring difficulties in comprehension were observed. Learning was deemed to have occurred if scores for the GSQ, GWSE, and/or ATWG improved significantly from pre- to post-course. The post-course questionnaire also included transfer intention as an additional indicator of learning, as well as course evaluation, instructor evaluation, and enjoyment, which assessed the Kirkpatrick model Level 1 (Reaction). Data collected in the present study formed part of a wider program of research that also involved follow-up measures to assess the Kirkpatrick model Levels 3 and 4, and qualitative methods used during OAE and at follow-up (see Cooley et al., 2014; Cooley, Cumming et al., 2015). Results Preliminary Analysis Analyses were conducted using SPSS version 21. Data were screened and checked for outliers and normality (i.e., skewness and kurtosis). Extreme scores observed in some variables were retained, as they were considered a true reflection of the sample measured and had a minimal effect on the 5% trimmed means (Tabachnick & Fidell, 2013). As expected, many of the scales violated the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test of normality, mostly due to a negative skew. As this test can be oversensitive with large samples, where the risks of non-normal data are reduced, distributions were instead considered reasonably normal based on observations of histograms and Q-Q plots (Tabachnick & Fidell, 2013). In accordance with the standards framework (see Gunnell et al., 2014), as many of the questionnaire scales used in the present study were either newly developed or new to the OAE context, their reliability and validity were assessed using Cronbach’s alpha and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA; Amos Version 6.0; Table 2). Main Analysis Outcomes. Descriptive statistics are presented in Table 3 for all variables. With reference to students’ reaction (Level 1), the mean scores for course evaluation, instructor evaluation, and enjoyment were at the higher end of the scale, suggesting that, on average, the majority of students had a positive reaction to OAE. The mean scores also suggest that the majority of students had an intention to transfer learning back to university (Level 2). To compare the effect size for each learning outcome (Level 2), η2 was calculated based on recommendations from Levine and Hullett (2002) and interpreted according to Cohen (1988), whereby an η2 of .01 = small, .06 = moderate, and .14 = large. To reduce the risk of Type 1 error, a Bonferroni adjustment was applied to significance tests. Relationships. HMR was used to examine the relationships between predictor and outcome variables. HMR was chosen because it allowed for statistical control of demo graphics (age, gender, home vs. international student status, degree course, and English speaking vs. non-English speaking) and pre-course scores (GSQ, GWSE, and ATWG), while sequentially entering predictor variables in sets according to the levels of the Kirkpatrick model (i.e., Level 1 reaction variables followed by Level 2 learning variables). For example, when predicting a learning outcome (e.g., post-course GSQ), demographics and pre-course scores were controlled for in Step 1, reaction variables (i.e., course evaluation, instructor evaluation, and enjoyment) were entered in Step 2, and the other learning variables (i.e., GWSE and ATWG) were entered in Step 3. One HMR was used to predict course evaluation. Course evaluation was considered the main indicator of reaction (Level 1) because it incorporates a more generalized view of students’ overall course satisfaction compared with enjoyment and instructor evaluations alone, and it is typically used when evaluating learning experiences at university (Filak & Sheldon, 2008). A further three HMRs were used to predict key learning variables (Level 2; that is, post-course task and interpersonal GSQ and transfer intention). On the first run of the HMR analyses, collinearity diagnostics were examined to ensure that no independent variables contributed more than 50% of the variance to two or more regression coefficients (Cohen, Cohen, West, & Aiken, 2002). No variables were excluded for these reasons. In addition, to lower the risk of Type 1 and 2 error, adjusted R2 are reported, non-significant control variables in Step 1 were removed from the models to increase power in a subsequent run of the analysis (Cohen et al., 2002), and a Bonferroni adjustment was applied (α = .013). On occasions when an independent variable appeared to meditate the relationship between another independent variable and the dependent variable (i.e., a significant predictor becomes non-significant after another step is added to the model), mediation was assessed using the PROCESS macro for SPSS introduced by Hayes (2013). This analysis involved 10,000 bootstrap resampling to obtain bias corrected, 95% CI (Hayes, 2013) Discussion The first aim of this study was to assess the outcomes of OAE at Levels 1 and 2 of the Kirkpatrick model. At Level 1, descriptive statistics revealed positive reactions to the OAE experience in terms of enjoyment, satisfaction with the instructors, and general course evaluation. This finding supports previous studies that have consistently found OAE to be a memorable and highly valued aspect of the university experience (for a review, see Cooley, Burns, et al., 2015). At Level 2, students’ perceived use of interpersonal groupwork skills was significantly greater during OAE compared with baseline measures. Self-efficacy and attitudes toward groupwork were also significantly improved from pre- to post-course. Despite students typically scoring themselves highly in these areas before beginning OAE, there were still significant improvements reported from pre- to post-course indicating the occurrence of learning. In addition, students, on average, ended OAE with high intentions to transfer their learning back to university. Based on these findings, the present study supports the immediate benefit to students’ perceptions of their groupwork skills and attitudes following OAE. It is interesting to note that an increase was evident in the use of interpersonal groupwork skills during OAE compared with their typical behavior but not for task groupwork skills. This finding could be explained simply by the OAE course being less effective in prompting task groupwork skills. However, this explanation contradicts our previous qualitative research, in which students reported practicing and developing an array of task related skills during the same OAE course (Cooley et al., 2014; Cooley, Cumming et al., 2015). An alternative explanation could be that due to a lack of structured groupwork skills training prior to OAE, students may have overestimated their use of task groupwork skills at baseline. As they became more aware of what task groupwork behavior involves during OAE, they may have provided more critical, and perhaps more accurate, measures post OAE. This effect has been observed in previous interventions designed to enhance life skills (e.g., Holland, 2010; Woodcock, Duda, Cumming, Sharp, & Holland, 2012) and may be more likely to occur in task groupwork skills as students report using these less often during university than interpersonal groupwork skills (Cumming et al., 2014). A second aim of the present study was to investigate some of the psychological con structs that predict outcomes at Levels 1 and 2 of the Kirkpatrick model. At Level 1, enjoyment was found to be the largest predictor of students’ course evaluation, over and above that of the learning variables. Mediation analysis revealed that students’ perceived use of interpersonal groupwork skills before OAE positively predicted their reaction to the instructor and level of enjoyment reported at the end of OAE, which in turn predicted a more positive reaction to OAE overall. In accordance with social cognitive theory (Bandura, 1977), it is likely that students with a stronger belief in their use of interpersonal skills at baseline have a more positive interaction with their peers and instructors, experience more enjoyment during OAE, and ultimately value the experience more. Although the mediation analyses were somewhat exploratory and further testing is therefore required, the selection of predictor variables was theoretically informed, which increases faith in these findings. At Level 2, scores for interpersonal and task groupwork skills reported at the end of OAE were positively predicted by the reaction variables (enjoyment, instructor evaluation, and course evaluation) and post-course attitude and self-efficacy toward group work. These findings support the MOLT (Cooley, Cumming, et al., 2015) in demonstrating a positive relationship between course reaction and subsequent learning during OAE. Furthermore, in line with social cognitive theory (Bandura, 1977) and the theory of planned behavior (Ajzen, 1991), these findings demonstrate that attitudes and self-efficacy play an important role in the development of groupwork behavior during OAE. The present findings also indicate that a person’s attitude toward group work influences their interpersonal behavior during OAE, whereas their self-efficacy toward groupwork influences their task groupwork behavior. Finally, the present study revealed that pre-course interpersonal groupwork skills, pre- and post-course attitude toward groupwork, course evaluation, and enjoyment all positively predicted students’ intention to transfer their learning back to university. However, the degree of task and interpersonal groupwork skills reported during OAE and GWSE was not found to predict transfer intention. This finding is in line with previous research that has found affective and instrumental attitudes to be the strongest predictors of behavioral intentions (McEachan, Conner, Taylor, & Lawton, 2011). Mediation analysis indicated that interpersonal groupwork skills at baseline positively predicted students’ enjoyment and course evaluation, which in turn positively predicted transfer intention. Additional mediation analysis found post-course attitudes toward groupwork to be the strongest predictor of transfer intention in mediating the effects of pre-course attitudes, course evaluation, and enjoyment. These findings are aligned with the theory of planned behavior (Ajzen, 1991) in demonstrating that a favorable attitude toward groupwork and positive perceptions of existing groupwork skills are likely to facilitate behavioral intentions to transfer the outcomes of OAE. However, in addition, the findings again reveal the importance of having a positive reaction to the learning experience itself. Limitations and Implications for Future Research With regard to the methods used in the present study, the benefits of using the Kirkpatrick model to structure an evaluation are evident. In adopting a systematic approach, the present study addressed a number of limitations previously highlighted in OAE studies (Cooley, Burns, et al., 2015; Scrutton & Beames, 2015). The strengths included a large sample size, the use of baseline measures, exploring both outcomes and predictor variables, and introducing a range of questionnaires to the OAE literature. However, while evidence of their validity is provided, the exploratory nature of the CFA analysis used in some of these questionnaires means that further validity checks are required with new samples and con texts (as recommended by the standards framework; Gunnell et al., 2014). Social desirability and “pre/post-course euphoria” effects are often seen as an inherent issue in measures taken immediately before or after an experience (McEvoy, 1997). Although evidence for social desirability in OAE has been mixed (e.g., Sibthorp, 2003), steps were taken in the present study to reduce bias. For example, questionnaires were handed out by researchers who were independent of both the OAE center and the stu dents’ respective university departments, clear, unbiased instructions were provided to participants (written and verbal) with regard to them answering honestly and confidentially, and both positively and negatively worded items were used in the questionnaire scales, as recommended by Cumming (2013). Qualitative findings in our related studies showed a range of positive and negative comments (Cooley et al., 2014; Cooley, Cumming et al., 2015), suggesting that the efforts made to reduce social desirability were effective. Some limitations did, however, prove difficult to avoid in the present study, including the lack of a control or comparison group. As the present study was field based and involved a convenience sample of students who were attending the OAE program as part of their academic curriculum, the only accessible control participants were students from different degree courses who were not offered OAE, or students who had chosen not to attend. Without a substantial pre-screening program, a control or com parison group made up of these students would be likely to have different characteristics, making findings difficult to attribute to OAE alone. It would also have been ethically difficult to ask these students to give time to a study that is exploring an intervention they had not had the opportunity to attend. We acknowledge that this single sample, non-experimental design could be seen to reduce external validity and make it difficult to infer causality (Gray, 2014). However, the present study is strengthened by comprising a diverse student sample that is representative of a number of degree programs, incorporating the exploration of underlying factors related to outcomes, and in having findings that are triangulated with our previous qualitative studies (Cooley et al., 2014; Cooley, Cumming et al., 2015), which together explain how and why the OAE program, as a whole, provides an effective environment for group work development (Gray, 2014; Scrutton & Beames, 2015). Furthermore, the present study forms part of a larger action research program, which, from a pragmatist epistemology, has the primary purpose of producing practical knowledge, solutions, and understanding that can be used to inform and influence practice (Gray, 2014). In the words of Anderson, Miles, Mahoney, and Robinson (2002), “The aim of evaluation in practice is not to generate knowledge by proving cause and effect between the support [intervention] and the outcome, but to provide comprehensive information to document the degree of effectiveness and facilitate improvement” (p. 437). We therefore believe that the present study contributes toward this broader objective. Implications for OAE Practice Overall, the present findings provide a number of recommendations for practitioners. First, time should be spent improving students’ attitudes toward groupwork and perceived groupwork skills before they attend OAE, rather than waiting for the students to arrive before starting the learning process. For example, the MOLT (Cooley, Cumming, et al., 2015) recommends providing pre-course educational information in the form of a video, workshop, or briefing, to instill a greater belief in the importance of developing groupwork skills and an increased awareness of existing groupwork abilities for students to build on. Based on the present study, any improvements in attitudes and beliefs resulting from this type of frontloading are likely to result in a more positive reaction to OAE, improved learning, and greater intentions to transfer new learning. Further research is required to investigate the impact of pre-course psychological interventions. Another practical implication highlighted is the need for practitioners to reinforce positive attitudes and self-efficacy toward groupwork during feedback and reflection. The development of groupwork skills would likely be facilitated if students are convinced that learning is both meaningful and applicable when next faced with groupwork. The present study also highlights the importance of students responding positively to the learning environment and their instructors for optimal learning and transfer intentions to occur. This finding could be explained in part by self-determination theory, which recommends that for optimal growth, social development, and personal well-being, a learning environment should encourage feelings of competence, the ability to relate to the instructors and course content, and feelings of autonomy over the learning process (Ryan & Deci, 2000). To achieve this environment, it may be important for courses to be tailored and flexible to the needs of the specific group attending, for the learning objectives and their relevance to be well explained to students, and to allow students control and input over their development and activity selection during OAE (Cooley, Cumming, et al., 2015; Ryan & Deci, 2000). For practitioners who wish to evaluate their programs, the present study indicates that the questions commonly found in post-course feedback forms, such as “Would you recommend this course to a friend?” (i.e., Level 1 reactions), are largely predicted by course enjoyment and perceptions of the instructor, rather than actual learning, and therefore may not be suitable indicators of learning when used alone. Evaluation questions should instead be specific to each level of the Kirkpatrick model for a thorough course evaluation. To conclude, the present study provides a novel exploration of OAE with regard to developing groupwork in university students. A 2-day course was found to significantly improve groupwork skills, attitudes, and self-efficacy in students from pre- to post-course. It was also evident that learning and intention to transfer learning are optimized when students react positively to the learning experience and have positive attitudes and self-efficacy toward groupwork before and during OAE.  